Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 500                                                                  REPORTABL
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                             [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.3743 OF 2024]
                            AJAY RAJ SHETTY                                   …APPELLANT
                                                      VERSUS
                            DIRECTOR AND ANR.                             …RESPONDENTS
                            R1: DIRECTOR
                            R2: M/S ELECTRIEX (I) LTD.
                                                J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Leave granted.
2. This appeal has been preferred by the Appellant against the Final Judgment and Order dated
08.12.2023 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Order’) passed by the High Court of Karnataka
at Bengaluru (hereinafter referred to as the ‘High Court’), by which Criminal Revision Petition
No.164 of 2015 filed by the Appellant and Respondent No.2 has been dismissed.
BRIEF FACTS:
3. M/s Electriex (India) Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘Respondent No.2’ or ‘Company’) was
declared as a sick industry by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘BIFR’) on 31.10.2001 in Case No.49/2000. On 24.09.2002, the BIFR ordered for
a change in the management of Respondent No.2. Aggrieved by this Order, Respondent No.2
preferred Appeal No.340/2002 before the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction (hereinafter to referred to as the ‘AAIFR’). Such appeal was dismissed vide AAIFR’s
Order dated 15.01.2003. Following this, Respondent No.2 filed Writ Petition No.20033/2003 before
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
1


the High Court and it is relevant to note that the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation
(hereinafter referred to as ‘ESIC’) was also a party to the said writ petition, wherein the High Court
on 03.03.2008 remanded the matter back to the BIFR to consider the matter expeditiously keeping
in view the the interest of all the parties concerned and quashed the Orders of BIFR and AAIFR
dated 24.09.2002 and 15.01.2003, respectively.
4. On 01.07.2010, BIFR directed the Company to negotiate with the secured creditors for settlement
of their dues. On 01.02.2011, ESIC officials visited the factory premises of Respondent No.2 to
ascertain and verify about its deductions towards the Employees' State Insurance (hereinafter to
referred to as ‘ESI’) contribution for the period from 01.02.2010 to 31.12.2010. Pursuant thereto, a
Report was prepared which disclosed that even though deductions of Rs.8,26,696/- (Rupees Eight
Lakhs Twenty-Six Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety-Six) from the wages of Respondent No.2’s
employees were made for the above-mentioned period, the same was not deposited with the ESIC.
In the Report, the authorized signatory of Respondent No.2 had mentioned the Appellant’s name as
the ‘General Manager’ and ‘Principal Employer’ of the Company. On the basis of the Report, a
private complaint was filed by the Respondent No.1 for offence(s) under Section 85(a) 1 of the ‘85.
Punishment for failure to pay contributions, etc.—If any person—
(a) fails to pay any contribution which under this Act he is liable to pay, or
(b) xxx
(c) xxx Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (hereinafter to referred to as the ‘Act’) against the
Appellant and Respondent No.2 before the Special Court for Economic Offences, Bangalore
(hereinafter referred to as the “Trial Court”) namely, CC No.326/2011 on 11.10.2011.
5. The Trial Court on 28.09.2013 convicted the Appellant under Section 85(i)(b) of the Act and
sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for six months along with a fine of Rs.5000/- (Rupees Five
Thousand). Aggrieved, the Appellant and Respondent No.2 filed Criminal Appeal No.553/2013,
before the Principal City Civil and Sessions Judge, Bangalore which was subsequently transferred to
the Fast Track Court VI, Bangalore (hereinafter referred to as the ‘First Appellate Court’). The First
Appellate Court
(d) xxx
(e) xxx
(f) xxx
(g) xxx he shall be punishable—
(i) where he commits an offence under clause (a), with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years but—
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
2


(a) which shall not be less than one year, in case of failure to pay the employee's contribution which
has been deducted by him from the employee's wages and shall also be liable to fine of ten thousand
rupees;
(b) which shall not be less than six months, in any other case and shall also be liable to fine of five
thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in
the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a lesser term;
(ii) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses (b) to (g) (both inclusive),
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may
extend to four thousand rupees, or with both.’ on 14.11.2014 upheld the order of
conviction and sentence passed by the Trial Court and dismissed Criminal Appeal
No.553/2013.
Aggrieved by such Order of the First Appellate Court, the Appellant and Respondent No.2 filed
Criminal Revision Petition No.164 of 2015 before the High Court.
6. The High Court by the Impugned Order dated 08.12.2023 dismissed the Revision Petition of the
Appellant and Respondent No.2 on the ground that the evidence on record clearly established that
the Appellant was General Manager and Principal Employer of Respondent No.2 and it was also
established that a contribution of Rs.8,26,696/- (Rupees Eight Lakhs Twenty-Six Thousand Six
Hundred and Ninety-Six) was deducted during the period 01.02.2010 to 31.12.2010 from the
employees of Respondent No.2, but not remitted to the ESIC.
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
7. The learned senior counsel for the Appellant submitted that the appointment of the
appellant was in July, 2009, to the post of Technical Coordinator in Respondent
No.2. This Court’s attention was also drawn to the fact that proceedings before the
BIFR was instituted in 2001, long before the Appellant’s appointment and further
that appointment order was not given as the Company was sick and salary was also
not paid. It was also contended that the burden is on the prosecution to show that the
Appellant was appointed as General Manager, which they have only done by referring
to the Report produced by the ESIC. The Report also cannot be relied upon as the
official who prepared it was not brought before the Court for the Appellant to
cross-examine him.
8. It was further submitted that the prosecution lodging case against the Appellant
for contravening Section 85(a) of the Act is erroneous as there is no such averment,
either in the complaint or in the evidence that it was the Appellant who had deducted
the contribution from the wages of the employees and had failed to deposit the same
with Respondent No.1. The other fact pointed out by the Appellant was that under
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
3


Regulation 10-C 2 of the Employees’ ‘10-C. Intimation regarding change in
particulars submitted at the time of registration of factory/establishment.—The
employer in respect of a factory/establishment to which this Act applies and to whom
a code number has already been allotted, shall intimate to the appropriate Regional
Office, Sub-Regional Office, Divisional Office or Branch Office, any change in the
particulars furnished in Form 01 at the time of registration of the
factory/establishment within two weeks of such change.’ State Insurance (General)
Regulations, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Regulations’), the Principal
Employer is required to submit Form 01(A) to the ESIC, but the same was not
produced.
9. Learned senior counsel submitted that the Appellant paid the entire dues to the
Respondent No.1 after the Impugned Order and at the time of filing Petition for
Special Leave to Appeal before this Court, hence prayed for his acquittal.
10. With regard to his designation, it is pointed out that in the counter-affidavit of the
Respondent No.2 filed before this Court, Paragraph 5 explicitly provides that the
Appellant was working only as a ‘Technical Coordinator’ in the Company and one Mr.
Ajit Hegde was the Principal Employer of Respondent No.2 at the relevant time.
11. The Appellant raised another leg of argument by contending that the guilt of the
accused has to be kept in mind while imposing liability under the Act. It was
submitted that the Act essentially criminalizes a civil wrong. This is evident by
perusing Regulation 31C3 of the Regulations, wherein it is provided that the ESIC has
the power to recover unpaid contributions from the defaulting employer by way of a
penalty and it is at the discretion of the ESIC to either waive off such damages or to
reduce the same by up to 50%. This is contingent on the Company being declared as a
‘sick company’, which Respondent No.2 was in this case. Therefore, ‘31-C. Damages
on contributions or any other amount due, but not paid in time.—If an employer fails
to pay contribution within the periods specified under Regulation 31, or any other
amount payable under the Act, the Corporation may recover damages, not exceeding
the rates mentioned below, by way of penalty:— Period of delay Provided that the
Corporation in relation to a company in respect of which a Resolution Plan has been
sanctioned by the National Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 may:
(a) Waive up to 50 per cent of the damages levied or leviable depending upon merits
of the case.
(b) in exceptional hard cases, waive either totally or partially the damages levied or
leviable.’ The Proviso above, prior to its substitution [Notification
No.N-12/13/1/2016-P&D dated 17-10-
2018], read as under:
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
4


‘Provided that the Corporation, in relation to a factory or establishment which is
declared as sick industrial company and in respect of which a rehabilitation scheme
has been sanctioned by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, may:
(a) in case of change of management including transfer of undertaking(s) to workers'
cooperative(s) or in case of merger or amalgamation of sick industrial company with
a healthy company, completely waive the damages levied or leviable;
(b) in other cases, depending on its merits, waive up to 60 per cent damages levied or
leviable;
(c) in exceptional hard cases, waive either totally or partially the damages levied or
leviable.’ ESIC ought to have adopted a more liberal approach instead of pressing for
criminal prosecution.
12. Learned senior counsel summed up his argument stating that, if at all the appellant is to be
convicted, it can be for a day till the rising of the Court. He relied on the judgment of this Court in
ESI Corpn. v A K Abdul Samad, (2016) 4 SCC 785.
SUBMISSIONS BY RESPONDENT NO.1:
13. Learned counsel for Respondent No.1 submitted that the Appellant had a chance to produce
documents to show that he was only a ‘Technical Coordinator’. Furthermore, the High Court made
an observation that the Appellant also had an opportunity to produce wage-slips or pay-slips to
show his status, and the same was not done. The Appellant also made no efforts to summon any
relevant documents from Respondent No.2.
14. The learned counsel for ESIC also drew the Court’s attention to a judgment of the Madras High
Court in Pentafour Products Ltd. v. Union of India, 2005 SCC Online Mad 841, wherein the issue
pertained to the applicability of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 vis-à-vis
Sections 22(1)4 and 22A5 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1986. The
Madras High Court ruled that an order declaring a company sick under the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1986 did not prohibit criminal proceedings against such
company, under Sections 22(1) or 22A thereof.
15. It was submitted by learned counsel that the High Court observed that despite there being
sufficient evidence against the Appellant, he was convicted under Section 85(i)(b) of the Act and ‘22.
Suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, etc.—(1) Where in respect of an industrial company, an
inquiry under Section 16 is pending or any scheme referred to under Section 17 is under preparation
or consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an appeal under Section
25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association of
the industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act or other law, no
proceedings for the winding up of the industrial company or for execution, distress or the like
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
5


against any of the properties of the industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in
respect thereof and no suit for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any security against
the industrial company or of any guarantee in respect of any loans or advance granted to the
industrial company shall lie or be proceeded with further, except with the consent of the Board or, as
the case may be, the Appellate Authority.
xxx’ ‘22-A. Direction not to dispose of assets.—The Board may, if it is of opinion that any direction is
necessary in the interest of the sick industrial company or creditors or shareholders or in the public
interest, by order in writing, direct the sick industrial company not to dispose of, except with the
consent of the Board, any of its assets—
(a) during the period of preparation or consideration of the scheme under Section 18; and
(b) during the period beginning with the recording of opinion by the Board for winding up of the
company under sub-section (1) of Section 20 and up to commencement of the proceedings relating
to the winding up before the concerned High Court.’ not under Section 85(i)(a) of the Act, thereby
giving him a lesser sentence. In this backdrop, he sought dismissal of the appeal. SUBMISSIONS BY
RESPONDENT NO.2:
16. Learned counsel for Respondent No.2 submitted that the Appellant after completing
Engineering course without any industrial experience joined as ‘Technical Coordinator’ in the
Company in July, 2009. He worked from July, 2009 to April, 2011 with the Company. He was only a
Technical Coordinator and never acted as Principal Employer nor as General Manager.
17. Learned counsel also submitted that one of the promoters of the Company is the Principal
Employer, namely Mr. Ajit Hegde. It was further submitted that the Appellant cleared the balance
amount of Rs. 6,86,696/- (Rupees Six Lakhs Eighty-Six Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety-Six) of
ESIC dues on 22.12.2023, though he was not the Principal Employer or General Manager of
Respondent No.2 and counsel submitted that after the BIFR was dissolved by the Central
Government (in 2016), the Company cleared the Provident Fund Account dues and made a one-time
full and final settlement with all its employees.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
18. The basic point canvassed by the Appellant is that he neither held the post of General Manager
nor was he the ‘Principal Employer’ during the relevant period. The submission urged was that the
liability was on the Company for making payments to the ESIC, therefore, he could not be charged,
much less convicted, for an offence under the Act.
19. The Trial Court, the First Appellate Court as well as the High Court have returned concurrent
findings of fact that the Appellant was liable, as in the record of Respondent No.2/Company he was
described as General Manager, which could not be controverted by him. Further, there is also a
finding that except for a stand taken before the authorities/Court, the Appellant was not able to
show that he was not holding such a post or was not designated as General Manager, on the basis of
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
6


his appointment letter, pay-slips etc. Moreover, the Appellant who, be it noted, does not deny that
he was under the employment of Respondent No.2/Company has not disclosed as to who was/were
the person(s) holding such positions during the relevant period of time, about which he could not
have been ignorant. Section 2(17) of the Act, which defines ‘principal employer’, reads as under:
‘(17) “principal employer” means—
(i) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and includes the managing agent
of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or occupier,
and where a person has been named as the manager of the factory under the
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so named;
(ii) in any establishment under the control of any department of any Government in
India, the authority appointed by such Government in this behalf or where no
authority is so appointed, the head of the department;
(iii) in any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision and
control of the establishment;’
20. From the above, it is clear that the definition also includes a ‘managing agent’ of the
Owner/Occupier in the case of a factory or ‘named as the manager of the factory under the Factories
Act, 1948’ (hereinafter referred to as the “Factories Act”) and for ‘any other establishment’,
‘principal employer’ would include ‘any person responsible for the supervision and control of the
establishment’. Therefore, designation of a person can be immaterial if such person otherwise is an
agent of the Owner/Occupier or supervises and controls the establishment in question. From the
materials available on record, we find that the Appellant falls within the ambit of Section 2(17) of the
Act, being a ‘managing agent’.
21. Before the High Court, two decisions were relied upon by the Appellant viz. Employees’ State
Insurance Corpn., Chandigarh v Gurdial Singh, AIR 1991 SC 1741 and J K Industries Limited v Chief
Inspector of Factories and Boilers, (1996) 6 SCC 665. In our view, these are clearly distinguishable.
In Gurdial Singh (supra), it was held that when a factory had an Occupier, who would fall within
Section 2(17)(i) of the Act, the Directors of the company concerned could not be roped in by
resorting to Section 2(17)(iii) of the Act, which was in the nature of a residuary clause. It was laid
down that in the absence of factual proof and of actual position, Directors could not be treated as
owners ipso facto. While holding that the High Court therein was right in affixing liability on the
company, in the event of an ‘occupier’, the occupier was liable to meet the demand, despite some
other person being named as a ‘manager’. To our mind, J K Industries Limited (supra) operates in a
different field i.e., in the context of liability under the Factories Act and the interpretation accorded
to, on whom liability falls on under the Factories Act, cannot be simpliciter accorded also to liability
under the Act, as the Act has specific provisions thereon. Ultimately, the Court concluded:
‘62. To sum up our conclusions are:
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
7


(1) In the case of a company, which owns a factory, it is only one of the directors of
the company who can be notified as the occupier of the factory for the purposes of the
Act and the company cannot nominate any other employee to be the occupier of the
factory;
(2) Where the company fails to nominate one of its directors as the occupier of the
factory, the Inspector of Factories shall be at liberty to proceed against any one of the
directors of the company, treating him as the deemed occupier of the factory, for
prosecution and punishment in case of any breach or contravention of the provisions
of the Act or for offences committed under the Act.
…’ (emphasis supplied)
22. Therefore, J K Industries Limited (supra) dealt only with the Factories Act and do not aid the
Appellant in the instant context.
23. Further, the High Court rightly indicated that non-remittance of the contribution deducted from
the salary of an employee to the ESIC is a offence under Section 85(a) of the Act and punishable
under Section 85(i)(a) of the Act but the Trial Court had imposed a lesser sentence as provided
under Section 85(i)(b) of the Act. This is clearly borne out by Section 85(i)(a) of the Act which
provides for a sentence of not less than one year imprisonment and fine of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten
Thousand), since the amount had been deducted from the salaries of the employees and not paid,
which is the fact in the present case, whereas under Section 85(i)(b) of the Act, sentence of
imprisonment is not less than six months and with fine of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand) in
other cases. Of course, the Trial Court could have given a lesser sentence even for an offence under
Section 85(i)(a) of the Act under the proviso to Section 85(i) of the Act. Overall, the High Court did
not feel the necessity to interfere in the lesser sentence awarded by the Trial Court. Thus, we find
that the conviction and the sentence does not require any interference, much less in the present
case, where despite contributions having been deducted from the employees’ salaries, they were not
deposited with the ESIC.
24. In A K Abdul Samad (supra), the question before the Court was as to whether discretion had
been granted only to reduce the sentence of imprisonment for a term lesser than six months or
whether it encompassed discretion to levy no fine or a fine of less than five thousand rupees.
Answering the said question, the Court held:
‘9. In our considered view, the clause “shall also be liable to fine”, in the context of the
Penal Code may be capable of being treated as directory and thus, conferring on the
court, a discretion to impose sentence of fine also in addition to imprisonment
although such discretion stands somewhat impaired as per the view taken by this
Court in Zunjarrao Bhikaji Nagarkar [Zunjarrao Bhikaji Nagarkar v. Union of India,
(1999) 7 SCC 409: 1999 SCC (L&S) 1299]. But clearly no minimum fine is prescribed
for the offences under IPC nor that the Act was enacted with the special purpose of
preventing economic offences as was the case in Chern Taong Shang [Chern Taong
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
8


Shang v. Commander S.D. Baijal, (1988) 1 SCC 507: 1988 SCC (Cri) 162]. The object
of creating offence and penalty under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 is
clearly to create deterrence against violation of provisions of the Act which are
beneficial for the employees. Non-payment of contributions is an economic offence
and therefore the legislature has not only fixed a minimum term of imprisonment but
also a fixed amount of fine of five thousand rupees under Section 85(a)(i)(b) of the
Act.
There is no discretion of awarding less than the specified fee, under the main provision. It is only the
proviso which is in the nature of an exception whereunder the court is vested with discretion limited
to imposition of imprisonment for a lesser term. Conspicuously, no words are found in the proviso
for imposing a lesser fine than that of five thousand rupees. In such a situation the intention of the
legislature is clear and brooks no interpretation. The law is well settled that when the wordings of
the statute are clear, no interpretation is required unless there is a requirement of saving the
provisions from vice of unconstitutionality or absurdity. Neither of the twin situations is attracted
herein.
10. Hence, the question is answered in favour of the appellant and it is held that the amount of fine
has to be rupees five thousand and the courts have no discretion to reduce the same once the offence
has been established. The discretion as per the proviso is confined only in respect of the term of
imprisonment.’ (emphasis supplied)
25. The decision in A K Abdul Samad (supra), thus, is of no help to the Appellant. While the fine
awarded and affirmed by the Courts below is upheld, we are not convinced to substitute the term of
imprisonment to be operative only for a day till the rising of the Court
26. Accordingly, the appeal, being devoid of merit, stands dismissed. The Appellant is directed to
undergo the sentence after setting off the period already undergone, if any and pay the fine, if not
already paid, as awarded by the Trial Court. The exemption from surrendering granted by order
dated 18.03.2024 stands withdrawn. The appellant shall surrender before the Trial Court within two
weeks from today.
27. Registry is directed to send a copy of this order to the Trial Court.
28. No order as to costs.
29. I.A. No.20317/2024 is allowed.
30. I.A. No.20329/2024 is disposed of.
.………………......................J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] ………………....................…..J. [AHSANUDDIN
AMANULLAH] NEW DELHI APRIL 17, 2025
Ajay Raj Shetty vs Director on 17 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82642110/
9
