2025 INSC 618
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2613 OF 2014
AMAN BHATIA …APPELLANT
VERSUS
STATE (GNCT OF DELHI) …RESPONDENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts:-
INDEX A. FACTUAL MATRIX ...................................................................... 2 B.
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT ............................................................... 4 C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ......................... 6 D.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT ...................... 9 E. ISSUES F
OR CONSIDERATION ................................................. 10 F. ANALYSIS
................................................................................. 11 i. Legislative intent behind the
d e f i n i t i o n o f “ p u b l i c s e r v a n t ” u n d e r S e c t i o n 2 ( c ) o f t h e P C A c t
........................................................................ 11 ii. Stamp Vendors are “Public
Servants” ..................................... 17 a. Interpretation of ‘Remuneration’ in light of the
Delhi Province Stamp Rules, 1934 ................................................................................
18 b. Meaning of ‘Commission’ under Section 194H of the 1961 Act and Section 2(c)(i)
the PC Act ...................................................................... 24 iii. Public Duty as the
determinant of status of Public Servant ... 29 iv. Legality of appellant’s conviction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2 G .
CONCLUSION............................................................................ 42
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Delhi
in Criminal Appeal No. 348 of 2013 (“impugned judgment”) by which the High Court
dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant herein and thereby affirmed the judgment
and order dated 30.01.2013 passed by the Special Judge in Complaint Case No. 11 of
2009 holding the appellant herein guilty of the offence under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)
read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 respectively (for
short, “the PC Act”).
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
3. As per the case of the prosecution, on 09.12.2003, the complainant went to the
Office of the Sub-Registrar, Janakpuri, Delhi to purchase a stamp paper of Rs. 10/-.
The appellant, a licensed stamp vendor, made a demand of Rs. 12/- for a stamp paper
of Rs. 10/-. Against the excess demand of Rs. 2/-, the complainant lodged a written
complaint with the Anti-Corruption Branch (for short, “ACB”).
Pursuant to the said complaint, a trap was laid by the ACB. The complainant was handed over one
GC note of Rs. 10/- and one GC note of Rs. 2/-, smeared with phenolphthalein powder, by the Raid
Officer. The complainant alongwith the raiding party left for the Office of the Sub-Registrar,
Janakpuri, Delhi. After reaching there, when the complainant asked for a stamp paper of Rs. 10/-,
the appellant again made a demand of Rs. 12/-. The complainant gave the smeared GC notes to the
appellant who accepted them with his right hand. At the signal of the panch witness, the raiding
party arrived at the spot. The appellant was apprehended. The wash of his hand turned the solution
of sodium carbonate pink and the notes were allegedly recovered from the register kept for
maintaining the records of the stamp papers.
3.1 Upon completion of the investigation, chargesheet was filed in the court of Special Judge
(Anti-Corruption Brach), Delhi. The Special Judge framed charges against the appellant for the
offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the PC Act respectively.
The appellant denied the charges and claimed to be tried.
3.2 In the course of the trial, the prosecution examined nine witnesses, of whom four are crucial for
the adjudication of the matter at hand:
i. Complainant (PW-1);
ii. Panch witness (PW-4);
iii. Raid Officer (PW-6);
iv. Investigating Officer (PW-9) 3.3 The Trial Court, upon appreciation of the oral as
well as the documentary evidence on record, held the appellant guilty of the offences
with which he was charged and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
a period of six months and fine of Rs.
1000/- for the offence punishable under Section 7 of the PC Act and rigorous imprisonment for a
period of one year and fine of Rs. 1000/- for the offence punishable under Section 13(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2) of the PC Act. The sentences were ordered to run concurrently.
B. IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
4. The pivotal issue that fell for the consideration of the High Court was “whether a stamp vendor is
a public servant for the purposes of the PC Act or not.” 4.1 The High Court answered the aforesaid
question in the affirmative.
It held that ensuring access to stamp papers, which are indispensable for legal transactions, falls
within the scope of ‘performance of a public duty’. The said public duty i.e., vending of the stamps, is
a licensed activity regulated under the statutes governing the sale of judicial and non-judicial stamp
papers. It further held that the fact that stamp vendors purchase these papers at a discounted rate
before selling them to the public does not diminish the public nature of the duty they perform. The
High Court added that in terms of Explanation 1 to Section 2 of the PC Act, it is not necessary for the
stamp vendor to be ‘appointed’ by the Government in order to be a public servant.
4.2 The High Court also adverted to the Delhi Province Stamp Rules, 1934 (for short, “the 1934
Rules”) and observed that Rule 28 of the 1934 Rules stipulates the conditions governing the grant of
license to a stamp vendor and violation of the said rule would amount to an illegal act. Further, Rule
28(xx) states that the remuneration to the vendor in the form of a discount is allowed from time to
time by the orders of the local Government. The High Court further took note of Rule 34 which
provides for remuneration to stamp vendors by entitling the licensed vendor of stamps to discount
on the amount of purchase.
4.3 Further, the High Court analysed the question whether any “remuneration, fees or commission”
was being paid to the stamp vendors by the Government. In other words, whether the discount
availed by the stamp vendor at the time of purchase of stamps from the treasury could be said to be
‘commission’ paid for the purpose of performing duty in terms of Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act. The
Court observed that the 1934 Rules clearly indicate the nature of the remuneration paid to a stamp
vendor. The Court termed the said discount as a fee for performing the task of a licensed agent of the
Government. Further, from the reading of Rule 34(ii) and 34(iii) of the 1934 Rules respectively, the
Court reached the conclusion that what is paid as commission to the stamp vendors is a discount at
the given rate on the stamps purchased and the same is treated as a commission.
4.4 Lastly, the High Court considered the decision of the High Court of Gujarat in Ahmedabad
Stamp Vendors Association v. Union of India, reported in 2002 SCC OnLine Guj 135, relied upon by
the appellant to fortify his submission that once the stamp papers are purchased by the vendor from
the treasury, there is complete ownership of the stamp papers with the vendors. The High Court
held that the said decision is not applicable to the facts of the case in the same way as it was
rendered in the context of Section 194H of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, “the 1961 Act”) and
the meaning of ‘commission’ was not considered in the light of Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act.
4.5 Thereafter, the High Court proceeded to look into the evidence on record to ascertain the
correctness of the finding of the guilt. The High Court noted that the panch witness had been
consistent as regards his statement about the appellant having accepted the tainted money. In this
context, the Court observed that if the appellant had not demanded excess Rs. 2/-, there was no
occasion to accept it in the first place.
4.6 As regards the recovery of GC notes – whether those were recovered from possession of the
appellant or from the register lying on his table, the Court observed that the wash of the appellant’s
hand did turn pink, and both the GC notes were found, even if not directly from the appellant, then
too certainly the notes were found placed on the register. Further, the testimony of the Raid Officer,
that it was the panch witness who pointed out that money accepted by the appellant was lying on his
register, was found to be reliable and trustworthy. The panch witness also stated that the accused
made an entry in the register after accepting the money. The High Court was of the view that the
evidence of the complainant corroborated by the evidence of the Raid Officer established the
culpability of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt.
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
5. Mr. S. K. Rungta, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the
prosecution instituted against the appellant under the PC Act itself was not maintainable. It was
argued that at best the prosecution could have been under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (for short,
“the 1899 Act”) alongwith the 1934 Rules, as these comprehensively regulate the sale of stamp
papers by licensed vendors and constitute a complete code for offences related to stamps. The
license of the appellant was cancelled in terms of Section 69 of the 1899 Act read with Rule 29 of the
1934 Rules. He submitted in arguendo that, the said cancellation was one of the consequences of
alleged demand of excess amount of Rs. 2/-. Hence, even if the appellant would have been found
guilty under the framework of the 1899 Act, the maximum possible sentence would have been
significantly lower than what the Trial Court has imposed in the present case.
5.1 Mr. Rungta further submitted that a bare perusal of Section 2(c) of the PC Act reveals that a
‘public servant’ has a co-relation with the service or office under the Central Government, State
Government or the local authority. He argued that the definition is exhaustive and a licensed stamp
vendor does not fall in any of the clauses. Therefore, the appellant cannot be said to be in service or
in office of the Central or State Government. Further, Mr. Rungta invited the Court’s attention to
Section 7 of the PC Act, prior to the amendment of 2018 and submitted that the provision deals with
acceptance of any gratification for showing any favour or disfavour to any person in relation to an
official act. To support his submission, he argued that an excess amount of Rs. 2/- could not be said
to be the motive or reward for showing favour or disfavour with Central Government or State
Government.
5.2 The second limb of Mr. Rungta’s submission was that the prosecution had failed to prove the
demand and acceptance of an excess amount of Rs. 2/- for sale of stamp paper of face value of Rs.
10/-. He submitted that the panch witness failed to support the case of prosecution of demand of Rs.
12/- thereby rendering the arrest memo, search and seizure memo also doubtful. Further, the
Investigating Officer admitted that the time of arrest of the appellant was 7:15 PM, however, the raid
was conducted around 3:45 PM.
5.3 He further submitted that there are glaring inconsistencies in the testimony of the panch witness
and the complainant as regards the recovery of the GC notes. The High Court in the impugned
judgment expressed doubts on the recovery of the GC notes since the seizure memo and other
documents were drawn up only later at the office of the ACB. He submitted that even the bottle
containing the sodium carbonate solution was sealed later at the Office of the ACB.
5.4 Mr. Rungta also highlighted a few mitigating circumstances for the purpose of reducing the
sentence awarded by the Trial Court, more particularly, the fact that the appellant was only 19 years
of age at the time of the commission of the offence.
5.5 In such circumstances referred to above, he prayed that there being merit in the present appeal,
the same may be allowed and the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court may be
set aside and the appellant herein may be acquitted of the charges levelled against him. Lastly, Mr.
Rungta highlighted a few of the mitigating circumstances for the purpose of reducing the sentence of
awarded by the Trial Court, more particularly the fact that the appellant was only 19 years of age at
the time of the commission of the offence.
D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
6. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent State,
on the other hand, submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said to have
been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment. She submitted that the High
Court has rightly taken the view that the licensed stamp vendor is a public servant for the purposes
of the PC Act. She further submitted that the 1934 Rules, more particularly Rule 34 therein makes it
abundantly clear that what is paid to the vendors by the Government is remuneration in the form of
discount. It was argued that the term “remunerated” occurring in Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act
should be given a meaningful interpretation so as not to frustrate the object of the PC Act. She
further argued that a stamp vendor cannot get away with his liability under the PC Act by arguing
that what is paid by the Government is in the form of a discount and not remuneration.
6.1 The learned A.S.G. submitted that the reliance placed by the appellant on the decision of the
Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat in the case of Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors Association
(supra), as affirmed by this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax, Ahmedabad & Ors. v.
Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors Association, reported in (2014) 16 SCC 114, is totally misconceived and
is of no avail to the appellant. She argued that the said decision was in the context of Tax Deducted
at Source on “commission or brokerage” under the contract of agency. In other words, the said
decision was considered only in the context of Section 194H of the 1961 Act.
6.2 She contended that the relationship between the Government and the stamp vendors is that of
principal and agent. The learned A.S.G. further submitted that the High Court was right not only in
saying that the stamp vendors are public servants for the purposes of the PC Act but even otherwise
on merits also, the High Court rightly affirmed the judgment and order of conviction passed by the
Trial Court.
6.3 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned A.S.G. prayed that there being no merit in
this appeal, the same may be dismissed.
E. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
7. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the materials
on record, the following two questions fall for our consideration:-
a. Whether the High Court was right in holding that a licensed stamp vendor falls
within the ambit of a public servant for the purposes of the PC Act?
b. If the answer to the aforesaid question is in the affirmative, then whether the
conviction of the appellant herein on merits is sustainable?
F. ANALYSIS i. Legislative intent behind the definition of “public servant” under
Section 2(c) of the PC Act
8. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we deem it absolutely
necessary to look into the backdrop of the PC Act. It cannot be lost sight of the fact that, the repealed
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (for short, “the Act 1947”), was enacted with the avowed object
and purpose of effectively preventing bribery and corruption. The PC Act which repeals and replaces
the 1947 Act provides for a very wide definition of the term “public servant” in clause (c) of Section
9. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, attached to the Bill by which the PC Act was introduced by
the legislature, throws light on the intention of the legislature in providing a very comprehensive
definition of the words “public servant”. It gives the background in which the legislation was
enacted. The PC Act, which contains a much wider definition of “public servant”, was brought in
force to purify the public administration. Para 3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons reads thus:
“3. The Bill, inter alia, envisages widening the scope of the definition of the
expression ‘public servant’, incorporation of offences under Sections 161 to 165- A of
the Penal Code, 1860, enhancement of penalties provided for these offences and
incorporation of a provision that the order of the trial court upholding the grant of
sanction for prosecution would be final if it has not already been challenged and the
trial has commenced. In order to expedite the proceedings, provisions for day-to-day
trial of cases and prohibitory provisions with regard to grant of stay and exercise of
powers of revision on interlocutory orders have also been included.”
10.The appellants in State of Gujarat v. Mansukhbhai Kanjibhai Shah, reported in (2020) 20 SCC
360, referred to the notes on clauses of Prevention of Corruption Bill dated 20.02.1987 to clarify the
legislative intent behind the statute. The relevant extract has been reproduced hereinbelow:
“36. Our attention was also drawn to the notes on clauses of Prevention of Corruption
Bill dated 20-2- 1987. Clause 2 of the Notes on Clauses in the Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, clarifies the legislative intent, wherein it was
commented as under:
“2. This clause defines the expressions used in the Bill. Clause 2(c) defines “public
servant”. In the existing definition the emphasis is on the authority employing and
the authority remunerating. In the proposed definition the emphasis is on public
duty. The definition of “election” is based on the definition of this expression in the
Penal Code, 1860.” (emphasis supplied)”
11.Under the repealed 1947 Act, the definition of “public servant” was restricted to public servants as
defined in Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”). In order to curb bribery and
corruption not only in government establishments and departments but also in other
semi-governmental authorities and bodies and their departments where the employees are
entrusted with public duty, a comprehensive definition of “public servant” was introduced in Section
2(c) of the PC Act.
12.When the legislature has used such a comprehensive definition of “public servant” to achieve the
purpose of punishing and curbing growing corruption in government and semi-government
departments, it would be appropriate not to limit the contents of the definition clause by a
construction which would be against the spirit of the statute. The definition of “public servant”,
therefore, deserves a wide and purposive construction. In construing the definition of “public
servant” in Section 2(c) of the PC Act, the Court is required to adopt a purposive approach as would
give effect to the intention of the legislature.
13.In the aforesaid context, we deem it appropriate to refer to the decision of this Court in State of
M.P. v. Ram Singh, reported in (2000) 5 SCC 88, wherein this Court observed as follows:-
“9. The menace of corruption was found to have enormously increased by the First
and Second World War conditions. Corruption, at the initial stages, was considered
confined to the bureaucracy which had the opportunities to deal with a variety of
State largesse in the form of contracts, licences and grants. Even after the war the
opportunities for corruption continued as large amounts of government surplus
stores were required to be disposed of by the public servants. As a consequence of the
wars the shortage of various goods necessitated the imposition of controls and
extensive schemes of post-war reconstruction involving the disbursement of huge
sums of money which lay in the control of the public servants giving them a wide
discretion with the result of luring them to the glittering shine of wealth and
property. In order to consolidate and amend the laws relating to prevention of
corruption and matters connected thereto, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
was enacted which was amended from time to time. In the year 1988 a new Act on the
subject being Act 49 of 1988 was enacted with the object of dealing with the
circumstances, contingencies and shortcomings which were noticed in the working
and implementation of the 1947 Act. The law relating to prevention of corruption was
essentially made to deal with the public servants, not as understood in common
parlance but specifically defined in the Act.
10. The Act was intended to make effective provisions for the prevention of bribery
and corruption rampant amongst the public servants. It is a social legislation
intended to curb illegal activities of the public servants and is designed to be liberally
construed so as to advance its object. Dealing with the object underlying the Act this
Court in R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay [(1984) 2 SCC 183 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 172] held:
(SCC p. 200, para 18) “18. The 1947 Act was enacted, as its long title shows, to make
more effective provision for the prevention of bribery and corruption.
Indisputably, therefore, the provisions of the Act must receive such construction at the hands of the
court as would advance the object and purpose underlying the Act and at any rate not defeat it.
If the words of the statute are clear and unambiguous, it is the plainest duty of the court to give
effect to the natural meaning of the words used in the provision. The question of construction arises
only in the event of an ambiguity or the plain meaning of the words used in the statute would be
self-defeating. The court is entitled to ascertain the intention of the legislature to remove the
ambiguity by construing the provision of the statute as a whole keeping in view what was the
mischief when the statute was enacted and to remove which the legislature enacted the statute. This
rule of construction is so universally accepted that it need not be supported by precedents. Adopting
this rule of construction, whenever a question of construction arises upon ambiguity or where two
views are possible of a provision, it would be the duty of the court to adopt that construction which
would advance the object underlying the Act, namely, to make effective provision for the prevention
of bribery and corruption and at any rate not defeat it.” (Emphasis supplied)
14.What is relevant to note from the aforesaid is that the PC Act was enacted after the repeal of the
1947 Act with the object of dealing with the circumstances, contingencies and shortcomings which
were noticed in the working and implementation of the 1947 Act. The law relating to prevention of
corruption was essentially made to deal with the public servants, not as understood in common
parlance but as specifically defined in the PC Act.
15.While holding that a deemed university would fall within the ambit of the PC Act, a three-Judge
Bench of this Court in Mansukhbhai Kanjibhai Shah (supra) observed that it falls upon the courts to
interpret provisions of an anti-corruption legislation in a manner to strengthen the fight against
corruption. It was further added that in case two views are possible, the court should accept the one
that seeks to eradicate corruption over the one which seeks to perpetuate it. The relevant
observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“25. However, we are concerned herein with interpreting the provisions of the PC Act.
There is no dispute that corruption in India is pervasive. Its impact on the nation is
more pronounced, due to the fact that India is still a developing economy. Presently,
it can be stated that corruption in India has become an issue which affects all walks of
life. In this context, we must state that although anti-corruption laws are fairly
stringent in India, the percolation and enforcement of the same are sometimes
criticised as being ineffective. Due to this, the constitutional aspirations of economic
and social justice are sacrificed on a daily basis. It is in the above context that we
need to resolve the issues concerned herein.
26. In Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh [Subramanian Swamy v.
Manmohan Singh, (2012) 3 SCC 64 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri) 1041 : (2012) 2 SCC (L&S)
666] , this Court observed : (SCC p. 100, para 68) “68. Today, corruption in our
country not only poses a grave danger to the concept of constitutional governance, it
also threatens the very foundation of Indian democracy and the rule of law. The
magnitude of corruption in our public life is incompatible with the concept of a
socialist secular democratic republic. It cannot be disputed that where corruption
begins all rights end.
Corruption devalues human rights, chokes development and undermines justice, liberty, equality,
fraternity which are the core values in our Preambular vision. Therefore, the duty of the Court is that
any anti-corruption law has to be interpreted and worked out in such a fashion as to strengthen the
fight against corruption. That is to say in a situation where two constructions are eminently
reasonable, the Court has to accept the one that seeks to eradicate corruption to the one which seeks
to perpetuate it.
44. As discussed earlier, the object of the PC Act was not only to prevent the social evil of bribery
and corruption, but also to make the same applicable to individuals who might conventionally not
be considered public servants. The purpose under the PC Act was to shift focus from those who are
traditionally called public officials, to those individuals who perform public duties. Keeping the
same in mind, as rightly submitted by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant State, it cannot
be stated that a “deemed university” and the officials therein, perform any less or any different a
public duty, than those performed by a university simpliciter, and the officials therein.” (Emphasis
supplied) ii. Stamp Vendors are “Public Servants”
16.In light of the observations made by this Court in Ram Singh (supra) and Mansukhbhai Kanjibhai
(supra), we now proceed to assess whether a stamp vendor comes within the purview of a “public
servant” as defined under Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act. The provision reads thus:
“(c) “public servant” means, -
(i) any person in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by the
Government by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty;”
17.A person would be a public servant under Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act if he is:
1. in the service of the Government; or
2. in the pay of the Government;
3. remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty.
18.All three categories are independent of each other. There may be cases where more than one of
the aforesaid categories are applicable and “or” may be read as “and”, however, the present case
does not warrant such reading.
19.In the present factual matrix, for the appellant to be a public servant under Section 2(c)(i) of the
PC Act, two conditions will have to be fulfilled:
1. First, whether he is remunerated by the Government through fees or commission;
2. Secondly, whether such remuneration is for the performance or discharge of a
public duty.
a. Interpretation of ‘Remuneration’ in light of the Delhi Province Stamp Rules, 1934
20.To arrive at a decision on the first aspect, what is required to be determined is whether the
discount received by the appellant is remuneration in the terms of the expression “remunerated by
the Government by fees or commission for the performance of any duty” under Section 2(c)(i) of the
PC Act. To determine whether the appellant was being remunerated by the Government, we must
make a reference to the 1934 Rules. Rule 1(f) defines the expression, “licensed agent”, whereas, Rule
1(g) along with Rule 22 defines the term “vendor”. The same reads thus:-
“(f) the expression “Licensed Agent” means and includes every person who, for the
time being holds a licence granted under these rules, to sell stamps, but does not
include a specially licensed agent or an ex- officio agent, as such, though an ex-officio
agent may, if duly licensed, be also a licensed agent. The expression “licence” means a
licensed agent’s license;” “(g) the term “vendor” includes an ex-officio agent, a
licensed agent and a specially licensed agent” xxx
22. Vendors – There will be two classes of agent, namely –
(a) ex-officio agent as vendor, defined in rule I(e).
(b) licensed or specially licensed agent as defined in rule I(f), (g) & (h).” Rule 26 stipulates that the
Collector or any other officer empowered by the local Government can grant license for the sale of
stamps.
21.Rule 2 stipulates that the Controller of Stamps is responsible for supplying stamps that are
required by the local Government. The Controller of Stamps supplies stamps on the request of
treasury officers. As per Rule 3, the district treasury has been constituted as a local depot and the
sub-treasury has been constituted as a branch depot for the custody and sale of stamps.
22.Rule 17 mandates that utmost care must be taken to ensure that no licensed vendor is hindered
from obtaining stamps from treasuries. Furthermore, it stipulates that vendors must be permitted to
procure supplies on any day and at any hour during treasury working hours, without unnecessary
delay.
23.Further, Rule 28 states the conditions which every license granted under the rules is subject to.
Rule 28(vii) prescribes that a vendor is bound to sell stamps on immediate payment permitted by
his license. Further, he shall not demand or accept for any stamp any consideration exceeding the
value of such stamp. Rule 28(xiii) also mandates that the vendor shall make corresponding entries
in his vend register and get the entry attested by the purchaser. Upon filling up of the register, the
vendor has to deliver the same to the Collector or any other officer deputed to receive the same.
24.Lastly, Rule 28(xx) mandates that the remuneration to the vendor shall be in the form of
discount allowed from time to time under the orders of the local Government. In furtherance, Rule
34 states the rule for remuneration of vendors, under the heading “Commission allowed on
Court-fee stamps”. It states that every licensed vendor of court-fee stamps shall be entitled to
discount at the rate of 1% on stamps upto Rs. 100 in a single transaction purchased by him,
however, the total value of stamps shall neither be less than Rs. 10/- nor in excess of a multiple of
Rs. 10/-. The said rule is reproduced hereinbelow:
“(xx) The remuneration to the vendor shall be in the form of discount allowed from
time to time under the orders of the local Government.”
25.The 1934 Rules indicate that a licensed vendor, under the rules obtains stamps from the treasury
and the Rules empower him to procure the stamps without any wait or delay. He is entitled to a
discount on the value of stamps at the time of purchase. The remuneration envisaged under Rule
28(xx) alongwith Rule 34 of the 1934 Rules is in the form of ‘discount’ or ‘commission’ under the
orders of the local Government.
26.In terms of the 1934 Rules, when a licensed vendor procures stamps from the treasury at a
discounted rate which is lower than their face value, and subsequently sells them to purchasers at
their face value, the difference between the two amounts constitutes the vendor’s remuneration. For
instance, if a stamp vendor purchases a stamp with a face value of Rs. 100/- at a one percent
discount, he pays Rs. 99/-. In return, he sells it to the purchaser for Rs. 100/-, i.e., the face value of
the stamp. Thus, the one percent discount by the orders of the local Government effectively becomes
the vendor’s remuneration, representing the margin between the procurement cost and the sale
price. The rules neither envision nor indicate any other form of remuneration.
27.The difference between the procurement price and the sale price is by and large because of the
scheme devised by the Government i.e., the 1934 Rules. The remuneration being received by the
licensed vendor is on the strength of the license that the vendor is holding. Although, it is true that
the liability of the stamp vendor to pay the price less the discount is not dependent or contingent
upon the sale of the stamp papers yet the remuneration remains contingent on the order of the local
Government under Rule 28(xx) of the 1934 Rules.
28.Assuming, that no such discount was provided and the licensed vendors were required to
purchase stamps at their face value and sell them at the same value, there would be no financial
incentive for the licensed vendors to engage in such transactions. In such a scenario, the vendor
would merely recover the amount expended on the purchase of the stamps, without any margin of
profit. The discount, therefore, serves as a form of remuneration and operates as a commercial
incentive, enabling the vendor not only to recoup the purchase amount but also to earn a
commission in the nature of the differential amount between the procurement cost and the face
value. Hence, the discount is the only form of commission.
29.At this stage, we deem it appropriate to refer to the object behind the stamp duty. It is important
to underscore that the object of the 1899 Act, along with its provisions, must be interpreted in light
of the interest of the Government in ensuring adequate remuneration to licensed stamp vendors.
While examining the relevant provisions, it is pertinent to ask—why does the Government find it
necessary to remunerate a licensed stamp vendor at all?
30.The 1899 Act is a fiscal enactment, enacted with the primary objective of securing revenue for the
State through the imposition of stamp duties on certain instruments. This underlying purpose is
clearly reflected in Section 3 of the 1899 Act. Section 5 further bolsters the object by stating that
where an instrument deals with several distinct matters, the total stamp duty payable would be
equal to the combined duty that would apply if each matter were covered by a separate instrument.
In furtherance of Section 5, Section 6 states that where duties chargeable under the different
descriptions under Schedule I are different, the instrument shall be chargeable with the highest of
them.
31.Sections 13 and 14 stipulate the mode of stamping respectively, Section 15 reinforces the effect of
non-compliance of the preceding provisions and deems it unstamped. Section 17 provides that all
instruments chargeable with duty and executed by any person in India shall be stamped before or at
the time of execution. Noncompliance of Section 17 is penalised under Section 62. Section 33 provides that every person who
has authority to receive evidence shall impound an instrument which is, in their opinion, chargeable
with duty but appears to be not duly stamped. The procedure laid down by the statute to be followed
after such impounding also ensures that there is payment of stamp duty and the exchequer does not
incur any revenue loss.
32.Section 35 is of particular significance to the issue before this Court as it renders instruments
which are not duly stamped inadmissible in evidence for any purpose and imposes a prohibition on
such instruments from being acted upon, registered, or authenticated. However, the bar is removed
on payment of duty and the penalty. The Collector, again, by powers vested in him under Section 40
is authorised to levy penalty. Section 42 reinforces that the purpose of stamping is in payment of
duty, as once the payment of duty and a penalty is complete, the instrument is admissible.
33.The common thread running across the above-mentioned provisions is that the Government
desires that the holder of the instrument pays appropriate stamp duty. To fulfil this objective, the
Government ensures there is sufficient availability of stamps through licensed stamp vendors. It is
for this reason the Government remunerates a stamp vendor as he is facilitating the accessibility of
stamps on behalf of the Government, and thus the role being performed by licensed stamp vendor is
nothing short of a highly important public duty, essential for ensuring the efficient collection of
revenue on behalf of the State.
b. Meaning of “Commission” under Section 194H of the 1961 Act and Section 2(c)(i) the PC Act
34.We may test the case of the appellant from another standpoint. The appellant by relying on
Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors (supra), which was affirmed by this Court in Commissioner of Income
Tax, Ahmedabad (supra), submitted that the stamp vendors are not agents of the State Government.
It was submitted that the purchase of stamps by the vendor from the treasury results in the transfer
of ownership to the vendor, thereby precluding the characterization of the relationship as one of
principal and agent. Consequently, the discount on the purchase of the stamps cannot be said to be
commission neither in terms of Section 194H of the 1961 Act nor in terms of Section 2(c)(i) of the PC
Act. The appellant’s submission although, at first glance, appears persuasive, but it does not
withstand scrutiny.
35.The High Court of Gujarat in Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors (supra) held that in spite of the
restrictions on a licensed stamp vendor under the relevant rules, the transactions would still be a
sale and not one between a principal and agent. There is no gainsaying that although the
Government has imposed restrictions on the licensed stamp vendors by way of the relevant rules
qua the manner of carrying on the business yet the vendors are required to purchase the stamps on
payment of price less the discount on principal-to- principal basis.
36.The decision rendered by the Gujarat High Court in Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors (supra) was also
looked into by the High Court of Uttarakhand in the case of Roorkee Stamp Vendor Association v.
State of Uttarakhand, reported in 2013 SCC OnLine Utt 3764. The High Court, while dealing with an
identical issue – namely, whether the amount received by stamp vendors from treasury, upon the
subsequent sale of the stamps to purchasers is by way of holding a position of an agent of the
treasury, adopted the reasoning assigned by the Gujarat High Court. The High Court of Kerala in
Kerala State Stamp Vendors Association v. Office of the Accountant-General, reported in 2005 SCC
OnLine Ker 672, in agreement with the findings of Ahmedabad Stamp Vendors (supra), took a
corresponding view that the licensed stamp vendors are not agents of the Government and are
independent dealers in stamps, though they are subject to the relevant rules in regards of purchase
and sale of stamps.
37.The definition of “public servant” cannot be understood devoid of the context in which it came to
be incorporated and the manner in which it has been subsequently interpreted by this Court as
elucidated in the preceding section of this judgment.
38.The heart of the definition of “public servant” under Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act lies in the
expressions “remunerated by the Government” and “for the performance of any public duty”, and
not in the mode of remuneration, such as “fees or commission”. The ‘commission’ referred in
“remunerated by the Government by fees or commission for the performance of public duty” is not
analogous to the ‘commission’ in Section 194H of the 1961 Act. The terms “fees” and “commission”
are merely indicative of the mode of remuneration and not determinative of the position held by a
person. Their presence or absence does not alter the core question as to whether a person is
remunerated by the Government for the performance of any public duty, which remains the central
consideration under Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act.
39.The interpretation of a definition should not only avoid being repugnant to the context but it
should also be interpreted to achieve the purpose which is sought to be served by the statute. A
construction which would defeat or may likely defeat the purpose of the Act has to be ignored and
not accepted. A definition, like any other word in a statute, has to be read in the light of the context
and scheme of the Act.
40.The definition of “public servant” under Section 2(c)(i) can be said to have three parts, as they
are disjunctive: first, a person who is in the service of the Government; secondly, a person who is in
the pay of the Government; thirdly, a person who is remunerated by fees or commission for the
performance of any public duty. The expression “remunerated” in the third part has to be read in
context and in line with the expressions in the first and the second part i.e., “in the service” and “in
the pay”. The three key expressions, “in the service”, “in the pay” and “remunerated” by the
Government belong to the same genus and have the same flavour. In the first two parts, a person is
rendering his services for the Government which implicitly means discharging a public duty.
Whereas, in the third part, even though a person is not rendering his services for the Government
but is being remunerated for discharging a public duty. In this context, the terms “fees or
commission” must be construed so as to give full effect to the definition and the other provisions of
the statute.
41.Further, the term “commission” as used and understood in the context of Section 194H of the
1961 Act is not stricto sensu similar to its usage in Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act. When a person is in
service of the Government, as is contemplated under the first part of Section 2(c)(i), he is said to be
in a master-servant relationship where the employer employs the person on the basis of salary.
Whereas, in the second part, a person may not be a regular employee but is receiving salary from his
master. A five-Judge Bench of this Court in M. Karunanidhi v. Union of India, reported in (1979) 3
SCC 431, although in the context of Section 21, Twelfth, of the IPC, has interpreted the word ‘pay’ as
implying that a person is getting salary, compensation, wages or any amount of money yet a
relationship of master-servant need not exist in all cases.
42.Further, as the master-servant or principal-agent relationship has already been envisaged under
the first part, the legislature could not have intended to address it again under the third part. The
structure of the definition reduces the emphasis on the strictness of the relationship between the
Government and the public servant, while placing greater focus on the performance of a public duty.
It is important to note that, the first two parts imply that the individual is rendering services directly
for the Government. Whereas, the last part suggests that even where the services are not rendered
‘for’ the Government, the Government may nevertheless remunerate the person for performing a
public duty.
43.Where the wording of a statutory provision indicates that the legislature has consciously
attributed varying degrees of significance to different interpretative elements such as the nature of
the relationship or the duty performed, the courts are obliged to adhere to that legislative
determination and interpret the provision in a manner that reflects the intended statutory scheme.
While interpreting a statute, it is essential not only to consider the words used but also to examine
the Statement of Objects and Reasons, as it provides the background against which the legislation
was enacted. The legislature introduced a comprehensive definition of “public servant” with the
intent to punish and curb the menace of corruption. In such circumstances, it would be improper to
construe the definition in a manner that limits its scope, thereby defeating the very essence and
purpose of the statute.
44.It is an important rule of interpretation that every interpretation of a statute must be undertaken
by considering the statute in its entirety, the prior state of the law, other statutes in pari materia, the
general scope and purpose of the legislation, and the mischief that the legislature intended to
address.
iii. Public Duty as the determinant of status of Public Servant
45.We now proceed to consider the case of the appellant on the second aspect of the definition of a
public servant i.e., whether the remuneration received by a licensed stamp vendor is for the
performance or discharge of a public duty. As we have discussed in the preceding section, it is the
nature of duty which is the determining factor in deciding whether a person qualifies to be a public
servant and not the manner of appointment or mode of remuneration. The primary test of
qualification for inclusion in the definition of “public servant” in the third part of Section 2(c)(i) is
whether the concerned person is performing any public duty. The commonality across the
sub-clauses of Section 2(c) is that all the persons therein are performing a ‘public’ duty. Section 2(b)
defines “public duty” as follows:
(b) “public duty” means a duty in the discharge of which the State, the public or the
community at large has an interest.”
46.Once the nature of performance of duties gets crystallized, any person remunerated by the
Government for the performance of any public duty or who holds an office by virtue of which he is
authorized or required to perform any public duty, is a “public servant” within the meaning of the
term defined under Section 2(c).
47.This Court in Mansukhbhai Kanjibhai Shah (supra), had held that the emphasis under Section
2(c) of the PC Act is on the public duty performed by him and not on the position held by an
individual. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“34. On a perusal of Section 2(c) of the PC Act, we may observe that the emphasis is
not on the position held by an individual, rather, it is on the public duty performed by
him/her. In this regard, the legislative intention was not to provide an exhaustive list
of authorities which are covered, rather a general definition of “public servant” is
provided thereunder. This provides an important internal evidence as to the
definition of the term “university”.
44. As discussed earlier, the object of the PC Act was not only to prevent the social
evil of bribery and corruption, but also to make the same applicable to individuals
who might conventionally not be considered public servants. The purpose under the
PC Act was to shift focus from those who are traditionally called public officials, to
those individuals who perform public duties. Keeping the same in mind, as rightly
submitted by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant State, it cannot be stated
that a “deemed university” and the officials therein, perform any less or any different
a public duty, than those performed by a university simpliciter, and the officials
therein.” (Emphasis supplied)
48.In G. Krishnegowda v. State of Karnataka, reported in 2021 SCC OnLine Kat 15332, the
petitioner therein was working as a project manager in a society registered under the provisions of
the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960, whose principal object was to develop skills in
construction and to undertake civil construction works assigned by the Government. On receipt of a
complaint of possession of disproportionate assets as against the known sources of his income, an
FIR was registered. The petitioner sought quashing of the FIR on the ground that
respondent-authority does not have the power to register a case against the petitioner as he is not a
public servant. The High Court held that having regard to the nature of work carried on by the
petitioner he would fall within the definition of the word “public duty” as defined under the PC Act.
Hence, even if an individual does not qualify as a public servant under the PC Act, they may still fall
within its ambit if they are engaged in the discharge of any public duty. The relevant observations
are reproduced hereinbelow:
“13. From the reading of the definition of the word ‘public servant as found in the P.C.
Act, it is very clear that a person who holds an office by virtue of which he is
authorized or required to perform any public duty, and any person or employee of
any institution if it has been receiving or if it has received any financial assistance
from the State or Central Government, shall be considered as a public servant. The
explanation to Section 2(c) of the P.C. Act would further go to show that such a
person may be appointed by the Government or not. Therefore, a public servant need
not be a Government/civil servant, but a Government/civil servant is always a public
servant.
20. Be that as it may, having regard to the fact that the Nirmithi Kendra in which the
petitioner is employed has been receiving funds from the State and the Central
Government and taking into consideration the definition of the word ‘public servant’
as found in the P.C. Act, it cannot be but said that the petitioner is a public servant.
Even if a person is not a public servant, but by virtue of his office if he is discharging
public duty, then he is covered under the ambit of the P.C. Act.
21. Corruption in our country is a growing menace and P.C. Act being a welfare
legislation is required to be interpreted keeping in mind the object and spirit of the
statute. In furtherance of the fight against corruption a broad interpretation to the
provisions of this statute is required to be given and the arms of this Act is required
to be extended to the maximum. The offences under the P.C. Act can be invoked not
only against a public servant but also against a person, who by virtue of his office has
been discharging ‘public duty’[...]” (Emphasis supplied)
49.The case of the appellant has tested positive on both aspects of the definition of a public servant
under Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act. The 1934 Rules envisage that the nascent discount eventually
matures into a form of remuneration. Further, the purpose of securing stamp duty fortifies the
motive behind the efforts of the Government to remunerate stamp vendors. Thus, the appellant, at
the relevant time, was being remunerated by the Government. Undoubtedly, the appellant was
discharging a duty in which both the State and the public have an interest, which, nonetheless,
brings him within the ambit of a public servant as defined under the PC Act.
iv. Legality of appellant’s conviction
50.We shall now consider whether the prosecution successfully discharged its burden of establishing
its case against the appellant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(b) respectively beyond reasonable doubt.
The oral evidence of the complainant reveals that on 09.12.2003, after lodging the complaint at the
ACB office, at about 2:45 PM, he proceeded with the raiding team to the Office of Sub-Registrar,
Janakpuri. At about 3:45 PM, he attempted to purchase a stamp paper of Rs. 10/- from the
appellant, who demanded Rs. 12/-, stating that it was his usual charge. As per the directions of the
Raid Officer, the complainant then handed over the smeared GC Notes from his shirt pocket, which
the appellant accepted with his right hand. At this point, the complainant failed to recollect as to
where the appellant had kept the money thereafter. He added that the ACB officials apprehended
the appellant, and the Raid Officer took a wash of the right hand of the appellant, which changed the
colour of the solution.
47.1 At this stage, the Public Prosecutor sought to cross-examine the complainant, alleging that as
the complainant was resiling from his earlier statement he be declared as a hostile witness. During
the cross-examination by the Public Prosecutor, the complainant revealed further details by stating
that the Raid Officer and Investigating Officer (IO) had recorded all proceedings at the spot. The
Raid Officer had instructed the panch witness to stay close to the complainant, listen to the
conversation, observe the transaction, and give a pre- assigned signal if a demand was made by the
appellant. He further added that when the complainant handed over the smeared GC Notes, the
appellant stamped the back of the stamp paper and made an entry in his register. The panch witness
then gave the signal, and the raiding team arrived and recovered the GC Notes from the appellant’s
register.
47.2 The Raid Officer testified that on 09.12.2003, he received a complaint alleging that a stamp
vendor was selling stamp papers of the value Rs. 10/- for Rs. 12/-. After explaining the procedure of
the raid, he instructed the complainant and the panch witness to stay close and tender the excess
amount of Rs. 2/- only if demanded. The panch witness was to signal completion of transaction by
moving his hand over his head. He stated that the IO and driver stayed behind while the rest
proceeded to the Office of Sub-Registrar, Janakpuri. At 4 PM, the panch witness gave a signal, and
the raiding team rushed to the spot. The panch witness pointed out that the money accepted was
lying on the appellant’s register. After the seizure, the witness called the IO and handed over the
copy of the raid report, seizure memos, exhibits, and the appellant. In his cross-examination, the
panch witness deposed that he did not hear the conversation regarding the demand and payment of
the excess Rs. 2/-. He admitted that the currency notes were lying on the register when he reached
the spot and were not recovered from the body or clothes of the accused.
47.3 The IO deposed that after leaving the ACB office, he stayed behind while the Raid Officer, the
complainant, the panch witness and others proceeded for the raid. At around 7:15 PM, the Raid
Officer called him to the location and handed over the documents. In cross-examination, the witness
admitted that the seizure memo does not mention that an attachie, sale register, and various stamp
papers were seized from the appellant’s seat. He also admitted that he was not present when the
appellant was apprehended and searched by the Raid Officer. The seizure memo was prepared by
him after the Raid Officer handed over the site to him as the IO, and he was unable to say when the
raid got concluded. He further deposed that the seizure memo pertaining to the currency notes
records the time of seizure as 4:15 PM.
47.4 Following this, the panch witness in his examination-in-chief deposed that on 09.12.2003, he
was deputed as a panch witness in the ACB. He, alongwith the complainant, Raid Officer, and other
ACB officials left for the Sub-Registrar Office, Janakpuri. The Raid Officer had directed him to stay
close to the complainant and overhear the conversation with the stamp vendor. At this stage, the
prosecutor sought permission to cross-examine him. On being cross-examined, he stated that the
GC Notes of Rs. 10/- and Rs. 2/- were recovered from the accused but he could not recall whether he
had informed the Raid Officer about any demand for Rs. 12/- instead of Rs. 10/- for a stamp paper.
In his cross-examination by the counsel for the appellant, he reiterated that he does not recollect
whether the appellant demanded for Rs. 12/- for a stamp paper of Rs. 10/-. He admitted that he was
very close to the complainant at the time of the transaction.
51.In C.K. Damodaran Nair v. Govt. of India reported as (1997) 9 SCC 477, this Court, although
interpreting the term “accept” in the context of the 1947 Act, observed that “accept” means to take or
receive with a consenting mind. In contrast, “obtain” was understood to imply securing or gaining
something as a result of a request or effort. In both instances, a demand or request by the receiver is
a prerequisite for establishing an offence under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the PC Act.
52.It is well-settled that mere recovery of tainted money, by itself, is insufficient to establish the
charges against an accused under the PC Act. To sustain a conviction under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)
of the Act respectively, it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the public servant
voluntarily accepted the money, knowing it to be a bribe. The courts have consistently reiterated
that the demand for a bribe is sine qua non for establishing an offence under Section 7 of the PC Act.
53.A five-Judge Bench of this Court in Neeraj Dutta v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi), reported
in (2023) 4 SCC 731, categorically held that an offer by bribe-giver and the demand by the public
servant have to be proved by the prosecution as a fact in issue for conviction under Sections 7 and
13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the PC Act. Mere acceptance of illegal gratification without proof of offer by
bribe-giver and demand by the public servant would not make an offence under Sections 7 and
13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the PC Act. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“88.4. (d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, the demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification by the public servant, the following aspects have to be borne in
mind:
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe-giver without there being any demand from
the public servant and the latter simply accepts the offer and receives the illegal
gratification, it is a case of acceptance as per Section 7 of the Act. In such a case, there
need not be a prior demand by the public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant makes a demand and the bribe-giver
accepts the demand and tenders the demanded gratification which in turn is received
by the public servant, it is a case of obtainment.
In the case of obtainment, the prior demand for illegal gratification emanates from the public
servant. This is an offence under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above, the offer by the bribe- giver and the demand by the public
servant respectively have to be proved by the prosecution as a fact in issue. In other words, mere
acceptance or receipt of an illegal gratification without anything more would not make it an offence
under Section 7 or Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii), respectively of the Act. Therefore, under Section 7 of
the Act, in order to bring home the offence, there must be an offer which emanates from the
bribe-giver which is accepted by the public servant which would make it an offence. Similarly, a
prior demand by the public servant when accepted by the bribe-giver and in turn there is a payment
made which is received by the public servant, would be an offence of obtainment under Sections
13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.” (Emphasis supplied)
54.It was further explained by this Court in P. Satyanarayana Murthy v. State of A.P., reported in
(2015) 10 SCC 152, as follows:
“23. The proof of demand of illegal gratification, thus, is the gravamen of the offence
under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act and in absence thereof,
unmistakably the charge therefor, would fail. Mere acceptance of any amount
allegedly by way of illegal gratification or recovery thereof, dehors the proof of
demand, ipso facto, would thus not be sufficient to bring home the charge under
these two sections of the Act. As a corollary, failure of the prosecution to prove the
demand for illegal gratification would be fatal and mere recovery of the amount from
the person accused of the offence under Section 7 or 13 of the Act would not entail his
conviction thereunder.” (Emphasis supplied)
55.From the above exposition of law, it may be safely concluded that mere possession and recovery
of tainted currency notes from a public servant, in the absence of proof of demand, is not sufficient
to establish an offence under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the PC Act respectively. Consequently,
without evidence of demand for illegal gratification, it cannot be said that the public servant used
corrupt or illegal means, or abused his position, to obtain any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage
in terms of Section 13(1)(d) of the PC Act.
56.The present case is not one of an “offer to pay by the bribe-giver” where, in the absence of any
demand from the public servant, the mere acceptance of illegal gratification would constitute an
offence under Section 7 of the PC Act. The expression “offer” indicates that there is a conveyance of
an intention to give, which must be communicated and understood by the recipient, leading to
meeting of minds. Consequently, the offer is accepted. For such an acceptance to constitute an
offence under Section 7, there must be clear and cogent evidence establishing that the public servant
was aware of the offer and accepted it voluntarily, knowing it to be illegal gratification. In other
words, even where there is no express demand, the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker must be shown
to have been ad idem as regards the factum of offer of bribe.
57.By applying the abovementioned principles to the evidence on record, we are of the considered
view that, having regard to material inconsistencies in the testimony of the complainant and the
testimony of the panch witness, the allegation of demand by the appellant herein does not emerge
clearly, let alone being proved beyond reasonable doubt.
58.Undoubtedly, when dealing with a wholly reliable witness, the court faces no difficulty in
reaching a conclusion, it may convict or acquit solely on the basis of such testimony, provided it is
free from any suspicion of interestedness, incompetence, or subordination. Similarly, in the case of a
wholly unreliable witness, the court again faces no ambiguity in discarding the testimony. The real
challenge arises when the witness is neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. In such situations,
the court must proceed with caution and seek corroboration in material particulars, whether
through direct or circumstantial evidence. The court’s duty to act on the testimony of a single
witness arises when it is satisfied, upon a careful perusal of the testimony, that it is free from all
taints and suspicions. [See: Vedivelu Thevar v. State of Madras, 1957 SCC OnLine SC 13; State of
Madhya Pradesh v. Balveer Singh, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 390]
59.Although, it cannot be said that the complainant did not support the prosecution’s case at all, yet
there were lapses on his part in disclosing significant facts alongwith material inconsistencies
between his testimony and that of the panch witness. The testimony of the complainant and the
Raid Officer reveal that the panch witness was instructed to accompany the complainant so as to
enable the raiding team to apprehend the appellant as soon as he makes a demand for illegal
gratification. The panch witness admitted that he was in a close proximity to the complainant and
the appellant at the time of transaction. The panch witness further deposed that there was no other
person on the counter of the appellant and thus the possibility of any exchange of communication
between the complainant and the appellant being not heard properly by the panch witness is also
negligible.
60.The necessity and desirability of a panch witness is particularly to be aware of the transactions
and to facilitate in carrying out the raid. On being questioned about a demand of Rs. 12/- being
made by the appellant, the panch witness lacked recollection on whether he had informed the Raid
Officer about any demand for Rs. 12/- instead of Rs. 10/-. Further, the Raid Officer deposed that he
did not hear the conversation regarding the demand and acceptance of Rs. 2/-. The prosecution did
not examine any other witness on the allegation of demand by the appellant.
61.Further, the panch witness, when confronted with a specific query regarding the demand,
deposed that he could not recollect whether the appellant had demanded Rs. 12/- for a stamp paper
valued at Rs. 10/-. He also did not indicate the presence of any implied demand.
62.We also find ourselves compelled to express doubt regarding the unexplained delay of
approximately three hours between the apprehension and seizure of the appellant and the calling of
the IO to the spot. According to the complainant and the Raid Officer, they arrived at the Office of
the Sub-Registrar at around 3:45 PM, and the Raid Officer received the pre-arranged signal from the
panch witness at approximately 4:00 PM. The seizure memo of the currency notes shows the time of
seizure as 4:15 PM. However, the IO stated that he was called to the scene by the Raid Officer only at
7:15 PM. Further, the seizure memo of the stamp papers and sale register do not mention the time of
seizure.
63.Further, we are conscious of the fact that only two currency notes were recovered, both of which
had been smeared with phenolphthalein powder. Notably, even accepting the prosecution’s case for
the sake of argument, the appellant was lawfully entitled to receive Rs. 10/- for the stamp paper,
irrespective of any demand for bribe. Since, the Rs. 10/- note itself was tainted it becomes difficult to
determine whether the change in the colour of the solution was triggered by the handling of the Rs.
10/- note or the Rs. 2/- note. Hence, the mere turning of the solution pink cannot, by itself, establish
the acceptance of illegal gratification.
v. Presumption under Section 20 of the PC Act
64.Insofar as the presumption under Section 20 of the PC Act is concerned, such presumption is
drawn only qua the offence under Sections 7 and 11 respectively and not qua the offence under
Section 13(1)(d) of the PC Act. The presumption is contingent upon the proof of acceptance of illegal
gratification to the effect that the gratification was demanded and accepted as a motive or reward as
contemplated under Section 7 of the PC Act. Such proof of acceptance can follow only when the
demand is proved.
65.In that case, the prosecution evidence alone cannot be considered for the purpose of coming to
the conclusion. The evidence led by the prosecution and, the suggestions made by the defence
witnesses, if any, are also required to be considered. It is then to be seen as to whether the total
effect of the entire evidence led before the court is of a nature by which the only conclusion possible
was that the public servant accepted the amount. If the answer is in affirmative, then alone it can be
held that the prosecution established the case beyond reasonable doubt.
66.Undoubtedly, the presumption under Section 20 arises once it is established that the public
servant accepted the gratification. However, in determining whether such acceptance occurred, the
totality of the evidence led at the trial must be appreciated. The evidence led by the prosecution, the
suggestions made by the defence witnesses, if any, the entire record is required to be considered.
Only if the cumulative effect of all the evidence is such that the sole possible conclusion is that the
public servant accepted the gratification can it be said that the prosecution has established its case
beyond reasonable doubt.
67.On examination of the entire evidence, we are of the opinion that the prosecution has failed to
establish beyond all reasonable doubt, the demand of bribe and its acceptance, in a trap laid by the
ACB. In such circumstances, there is no question of a presumption under Section 20. Consequently,
we find ourselves compelled to conclude that it would be entirely illegal to uphold the conviction of
the appellant under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) read with Section 13(2) of the Act.
G. CONCLUSION
68.In light of the aforesaid discussion, we have reached the following conclusion:
68.1 The legislature has used a comprehensive definition of “public servant” to
achieve the purpose of punishing and curbing the growing menace of corruption.
Keeping this intention of the legislature in mind, we are of the view that the
definition of “public servant” as defined under the PC Act should be given a purposive
and wide interpretation so as to advance the object underlying the statute. 68.2 It is
the nature of duty being discharged by a person which assumes paramount
importance when determining whether such a person falls within the ambit of the
definition of public servant as defined under the PC Act. 68.3 Stamp vendors across
the country, by virtue of performing an important public duty and receiving
remuneration from the Government for the discharge of such duty, are undoubtedly
public servants within the ambit of Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act.
68.4 In the case at hand, the appellant was eligible for receiving discount on the
purchase of stamp papers owing to the license that he was holding. Further, the
discount is traceable to and is governed by the 1934 Rules framed by the State
Government. Thus, the appellant, without a doubt, could be said to be “remunerated
by the government” for the purposes of Section 2(c)(i) of the PC Act.
68.5 Further, the prosecution has failed in establishing the allegation of demand for
illegal gratification and acceptance thereof beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, the
conviction of the appellant for the offences under Section 7 and 13(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2) of the PC Act cannot be sustained and is, thus, liable to be set aside.
69.In the result, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The conviction and
sentence of the accused, as awarded by the Trial Court and affirmed by the High
Court is set aside.
70.Bail bond(s), if any, shall stand discharged.
71.Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
…………………………..J. (J.B. PARDIWALA) …………………………..J. (R. MAHADEVAN) New Delhi, 2nd
May, 2025