2025 INSC 532 REPORT
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
5401 OF 2025
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6799 of 2022)
ANGADI CHANDRANNA ... APP
VERSUS
SHANKAR & ORS. ... RESPON
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted.
2. The appellant is the purchaser of a property bearing Sy. No. 93 measuring 7 acres 20 guntas
situated at Mahadevapura Village, Parashurampura Hobli, Challakere Taluk1. He has come up with
the present appeal against the judgment and order dated 12.08.2021 passed by the High Court of
Karnataka at Bengaluru2 in Regular Second Appeal No.1417 of 2006. By the impugned order, the
High Court allowed the Regular Second Appeal thereby setting aside For short, “the suit property”
Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court” the judgment and decree dated 21.02.2006 passed by
the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Challakere3 in Regular Appeal No.291 of 2002 and affirming the
judgment and decree dated 21.12.2001 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Judicial
Magistrate First Class, Challakere4, in O.S.No.169 of 1994.
3. The appellant herein is Defendant No.2 and the Respondent Nos.1 to 4, who are the sons and
daughters of Defendant No.1 (C. Jayaramappa), are the plaintiffs. For the sake of convenience, the
parties are referred to as per their rank in the aforesaid suit.
4. Defendant No.1 and his two brothers viz., C. Thippeswamy and C. Eshwarappa, after the death of
their father and uncle, who was issueless, divided the joint family properties under a registered
partition deed dated 09.05.1986. Subsequently, Defendant No.1 purchased the suit property from
his elder brother C. Thippeswamy by way of a registered sale deed dated 16.10.1989. Thereafter,
Defendant No.1 sold the suit property to Defendant No.2 by a registered sale deed dated 11.03.1993.
Hereinafter referred to as “the First Appellate Court” Hereinafter referred to as “the trial Court”
5. When the facts stood thus, the plaintiffs had instituted a suit bearing O.S.No.169 of 1994 before
the trial Court seeking partition and separate possession of the suit property. After due trial, the trial
Court vide judgment and decree dated 21.12.2001, decreed the suit as prayed for, by holding that the
plaintiffs are entitled for partition and separate possession by metes and bounds through revenue
authorities. Challenging the same, Defendant No.2 moved Regular Appeal bearing No.291 of 2002.
The First Appellate Court vide judgment and decree dated 21.02.2006, allowed the appeal and set
aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court. Aggrieved by the same, the plaintiffs filed
Regular Second Appeal No.1417 of 2006 which was allowed and the judgment and decree passed by
the First Appellate Court was set aside by the High Court, by the judgment and order dated
12.08.2021. Therefore, Defendant No.2 is before us with the present appeal.
6. The learned counsel for the appellant / Defendant No.2, at the outset, contended that the
question of law framed by the High Court for adjudication, is a pure question of fact, which cannot
be framed or decided while exercising jurisdiction under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908. In this regard, reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in Jaichand (Dead) Through
LRs & Ors. v. Sahnulal & Anr.5 and Gurnam Singh (Dead) by LRs & Ors. v. Lehna Singh (Dead) by
LRs6.
6.1. According to the learned counsel, the joint family property was partitioned in the year 1986;
subsequently, one of the brothers, Thippeswamy, sold his share i.e., the suit property to Defendant
No.1 vide registered sale deed dated 16.10.1989; and thereafter, Defendant No.1 sold the suit
property to Defendant No.2 vide registered sale deed dated 11.03.1993. The evidence adduced by
Defendant No.2 would clearly show that the suit property was purchased by Defendant No.1 using
his own funds and loan obtained from DW3 Narasimhamurthy and hence, the same should be
considered as self-acquired property of Defendant No.1. As such, at the time of sale, the suit
property was no longer a part of joint family property. Considering the said aspect, the First
Appellate Court rightly arrived at the conclusion that the suit property was a self-acquired property
of Defendant No.1.
6.2. It is further submitted that after the execution of the sale deed dated 11.03.1993 by Defendant
No.1 in favour of Defendant No.2 in respect of the suit property, the plaintiffs, who are the sons and
daughters of Defendant No.1, had filed the suit for partition and separate possession, without
seeking the relief 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3864 (2019) 7 SCC 641 of cancellation of the said sale deed.
Though the trial Court framed an issue, it decided that the said issue does not arise for
consideration, as in a suit for partition, there is no necessity to seek a relief of declaration of sale
deed executed in favour of third parties as null and void. In this connection, the learned counsel
referred to a decision of this court in Murugan & Ors. v. Kesava Gounder (Dead) Through LRs. &
Ors.7, wherein, it was held that a specific prayer for setting aside the sale deed is mandatory in the
suit for declaration and separate possession.
6.3. It is also submitted that the High Court erred in arriving at the finding that Defendant No.1 got
the suit property under the will dated 18.12.1978 and the same blended into the joint family
properties since then. Whereas, the property received by the Defendant No.1 under the partition
deed was different from the suit property and that, the suit property was purchased by him out of his
own funds and the loan obtained from DW3 Narasimhamurthy. Hence, the doctrine of blending
would not apply to the present case. The legal position in this regard is that the doctrine of blending
of self-acquired property into joint family pool would apply only when such self-acquired property is
voluntarily thrown into the common stock with intention to abandon separate claim over the same
[Refer: Mallesappa Bandeppa Desai & Anr. v. Desai Mallappa alias (2019) 20 SCC 633 Mallesappa &
Anr.8, and Lakkireddi Chinna Venkata Reddi & Ors. v. Lakkireddi Lakshmama9].
6.4. Stating so, the learned counsel prayed to allow this appeal by setting aside the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court.
7. On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents / plaintiffs submitted that the suit
property was acquired by Defendant No.1 through a sale deed dated 16.10.1989, for a total
consideration of Rs.15,000/- from C. Thippeswamy, using nucleus funds or joint family funds viz.,
income derived from the land allotted to the share of Defendant No.1 through partition; income
derived from doing coolie work; cash of Rs.10,000/- given during partition; and cash given by
Mallamma (grandmother of the respondents) by selling her property at Rayadurga and hence, the
same should be treated as ancestral property and not self-acquired property.
7.1. It is further submitted that when the partition among the Defendant No.1 and his brothers,
came into effect i.e., on 09.05.1986, the plaintiffs were minors and were co-parceners with respect to
the properties or amounts that were (1961) 3 SCR 779 (1964) 2 SCR 172 divided and allotted to
Defendant No.1’s share, as the family continued to reside jointly. As such, the plaintiffs have a right
over the suit property. 7.2. Referring to Hindu Law by Mulla, the learned counsel submitted that the
character of the ancestral property does not change with respect to the sons, even after partition, as
it is a settled principle of law that the share that a co- sharer obtains upon the partition of ancestral
property, continues to be ancestral for his male issues, who acquire an interest in it by birth,
whether they exist at the time of partition or are born subsequently. Therefore, the suit property,
which was acquired/purchased by Defendant No.1, remains ancestral property and the plaintiffs
have a right over the same. In this regard, the learned counsel placed reliance on the decision of this
Court in Yudhishter v. Ashok Kumar10. 7.3. It is also submitted that even assuming but not
admitting that joint family property once divided through partition, no longer remains as such and
is considered self-acquired, the court must examine the facts and evidence to determine how
Defendant No.1 acquired the suit property for Rs.15,000/- in 1989, either using nucleus funds/joint
family funds or with a loan obtained from DW.3. According to the learned counsel, there was no
reasonable possibility that within a period of just three years, the Defendant No.1 could have
accumulated a sum of Rs.15,000/- solely by doing coolie work or by cultivating the land (1987) 1
SCC 204 allotted to him by way of partition, and acquired the suit property. Further, no convincing
and reliable material was produced that Defendant No.1 obtained loan from DW.3. That apart, there
were contradictions and inconsistencies in the defendants’ side’s deposition only to suggest that the
suit property was acquired using joint family funds. On the other hand, the plaintiffs have
successfully discharged their burden by producing sufficient material to establish that the suit
property was acquired using joint family funds, and the character of the suit property must still be
regarded as ancestral.
7.4. Ultimately, the learned counsel submitted that there is no evidence to show that the suit
property was sold for the benefit of the estate. Rather, it shows that Defendant No.1 was in dire need
of money to continue his bad habits and not to look after the estate. That apart, the amount received
by Defendant No.1 after selling the suit property was never handed over to the plaintiffs for their
betterment. Therefore, it is submitted that the suit property was sold without the consent of the
plaintiffs and without any legal necessity, making the sale deed void.
7.5. Pointing out the above, the learned counsel submitted that considering all these aspects, both
the trial Court and High Court rightly decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiffs and the same do not
call for any interference by this court.
8. We have heard the learned counsel for both sides and perused the materials available on record.
9. As evident from the facts, there was a partition deed dated 09.05.1986, among Defendant No.1
and his two brothers in respect of the ancestral properties, after the death of their father,
Channappa, who had two wives and three sons through them. ‘A’ schedule property was allotted to
C. Thippeswamy (son through the first wife, Mallamma); ‘B’ schedule property was allotted to C.
Eshwarappa, (son through the second wife, Parvathamma); ‘C’ schedule property was allotted to
Defendant No. 1, (another son through the second wife, Parvathamma); and ‘D’ schedule property
was divided into equal shares among Defendant No.1 and his brothers. Subsequently, Defendant
No.1 purchased the suit property, which was allotted to the share of C. Thippeswamy through
partition deed dated 09.05.1986 (A-schedule property), by a sale deed dated 16.10.1989 for
Rs.15,000/-. Thereafter, he sold the suit property to Defendant No.2 on 11.03.1993 for a sale
consideration of Rs.20,000/. It is pertinent to mention here that the suit property is the property
allotted to C. Thippeswamy, later purchased by Defendant No.1 and not the property which was
received by Defendant No.1 through will.
10. Contending that the suit property was acquired by Defendant No.1 using joint family funds and
should therefore be treated as ancestral; he cannot sell it without the consent of the plaintiffs; and
plaintiffs 1 and 3, being coparceners of the joint family, have a share in the suit property, while
plaintiffs 2 and 4 have a right to maintenance from it, the plaintiffs instituted the suit bearing
O.S.No.169 of 1994 for partition and separate possession. The defence raised was that the suit
property was self-acquired property of Defendant No.1 and hence, Defendant No.1 has the right to
sell it to Defendant No.2. Before the trial Court, on the side of the plaintiffs, PW1 to PW3 were
examined and Exs.P1 to P3 were marked; and on the side of the defendants, DW1 to DW4 were
examined and Exs.D1 to D10 documents were marked. Upon analysing the same, the trial Court
decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiffs, which was reversed by the First Appellate Court.
However, the High Court set aside the judgment passed by the First Appellate Court and restored
the judgment of the trial Court. Therefore, this appeal came to be filed by the appellant / Defendant
No.2.
11. On the basis of the pleadings and submissions made by the parties, the main dispute in the lis is,
whether the suit property was ancestral or self- acquired property of Defendant No.1.
12. Before delving into the facts of the case, this court in Jaichand (supra) expressed its anguish at
the High Court for not understanding the scope of Section 100 CPC, which limits intervention only
to cases where a substantial question of law exists, and clarified that the High Court can go into the
findings of facts under Section 103 CPC only under certain circumstances, as stated in the following
passages:
“23. We are thoroughly disappointed with the manner in which the High Court
framed the so-called substantial question of law. By any stretch of imagination, it
cannot be termed even a question of law far from being a substantial question of law.
How many times the Apex Court should keep explaining the scope of a second appeal
Under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure and how a substantial question of
law should be framed? We may once again explain the well-settled principles
governing the scope of a second appeal Under Section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
24. In Navaneethammal v. Arjuna Chetty reported in MANU/SC/2077/1996 :
1998: INSC: 349 : AIR 1996 S.C. 3521, it was held by this Court that the High Court
should not reappreciate the evidence to reach another possible view in order to set
aside the findings of fact arrived at by the first appellate Court.
25. In Kshitish Chandra Purkait v. Santosh Kumar Purkait reported in
MANU/SC/0647/1997 : 1997:INSC:487 : (1997) 5 S.C.C. 438), this Court held that in
the Second Appeal, the High Court should be satisfied that the case involves a
substantial question of law and not mere question of law.
26. In Dnyanoba Bhaurao Shemade v. Maroti Bhaurao Marnor reported in
MANU/SC/0058/1999 : 1999 (2) S.C.C. 471, this Court held:
Keeping in view the amendment made in 1976, the High Court can exercise its
jurisdiction Under Section 100, Code of Civil Procedure only on the basis of
substantial questions of law which are to be framed at the time of admission of the
Second Appeal and the Second Appeal has to be heard and decided only on the basis
of such duly framed substantial questions of law. A judgment rendered by the High
Court Under Section 100 Code of Civil Procedure without following the aforesaid
procedure cannot be sustained.
27. This Court in Kondira Dagadu Kadam v. Savitribai Sopan Gujar reported in
MANU/SC/0278/1999 : 1999:INSC:192 : AIR 1999 S.C. 2213 held:
The High Court cannot substitute its opinion for the opinion of the first appellate
Court unless it is found that the conclusions drawn by the lower appellate Court were
erroneous being contrary to the mandatory provisions of law applicable or its settled
position on the basis of pronouncements made by the Apex Court, or was based upon
inadmissible evidence or arrived at without evidence.
28. It is thus clear that Under Section 100, Code of Civil Procedure, the High Court
cannot interfere with the findings of fact arrived at by the first Appellate Court which
is the final Court of facts except in such cases where such findings were erroneous
being contrary to the mandatory provisions of law, or its settled position on the basis
of the pronouncement made by the Apex Court or based upon inadmissible evidence
or without evidence.
29. The High Court in the Second Appeal can interfere with the findings of the trial
Court on the ground of failure on the part of the trial as well as the first appellate
Court, as the case may be, when such findings are either recorded without proper
construction of the documents or failure to follow the decisions of this Court and
acted on assumption not supported by evidence. Under Section 103, Code of Civil
Procedure, the High Court has got power to determine the issue of fact. The Section
lays down:
Power of High Court to determine issue of fact: In any Second Appeal, the High Court
may, if the evidence on the record is sufficient to determine any issue necessary for
the disposal of the appeal,-
(a) Which has not been determined by the lower Appellate Court or both by the Court
of first instance and the lower Appellate Court, or
(b) Which has been wrongly determined by such Court or Courts by reason of a
decision on such question of law as is referred to in Section 100.
30. In Bhagwan Sharma v. Bani Ghosh reported in MANU/SC/0094/1993 : AIR 1993 S.C. 398, this
Court held:
The High Court was certainly entitled to go into the question as to whether the
findings of fact recorded by the first appellate court which was the final court of fact
were vitiated in the eye of law on account of non-consideration of admissible
evidence of vital nature. But, after setting aside the findings of fact on that ground the
Court had either to remand the matter to the first appellate Court for a rehearing of
the first appeal and decision in accordance with law after taking into consideration
the entire relevant evidence on the records, or in the alternative to decide the case
finally in accordance with the provisions of Section 103(b). ...... If in an appropriate
case the High Court decides to follow the second course, it must hear the parties fully
with reference to the entire evidence on the records relevant to the issue in question
and this is possible if only a proper paper book is prepared for hearing of facts and
notice is given to the parties. The grounds which may be available in support of a plea
that the finding of fact by the court below is vitiated in law does not by itself lead to
the further conclusion that a contrary finding has to be finally arrived at on the
disputed issue. On a reappraisal of the entire evidence the ultimate conclusion may
go in favour of either party and it cannot be prejudged.
31. In the case of Hero Vinoth v. Seshammal reported in MANU/SC/2774/2006 :
2006:INSC:305 : (2006) 5 SCC 545 this Court explained the concept in the following
words:
It must be tested whether the question is of general public importance or whether it
directly and substantially affects the rights of the parties. Or whether it is not finally
decided, or not free from difficulty or calls for discussion of alternative views.
If the question is settled by the highest court or the general principles to be applied in
determining the question are well settled and there is a mere question of applying
those principles or that the plea raised is palpably absurd the question would not be a
substantial question of law.
32. It is not that the High Courts are not well-versed with the principles governing Section 100 of the
Code of Civil Procedure. It is only the casual and callous approach on the part of the courts to apply
the correct principles of law to the facts of the case that leads to passing of vulnerable orders like the
one on hand.” 12.1. In the present case, in our view, the so-called substantial question of law framed
by the High Court does not qualify to be a substantial question of law, rather the exercise of the High
Court is a venture into the findings of the First Appellant Court by re-appreciation of evidence. It is
settled law that the High Court can go into the findings of facts only if the First Appellate Court has
failed to look into the law or evidence or considered inadmissible evidence or without evidence.
Section 103 permits the High Court to go into the facts only when the courts below have not
determined or rendered any finding on a crucial fact, despite evidence already available on record or
after deciding the substantial question of law, the facts of a particular case demand
re-determination. For the second limb of Section 103 to apply, there must first be a decision on the
substantial question of law, to which the facts must be applied, to determine the issue in dispute.
When the First Appellate Court in exercise of its jurisdiction has considered the entire evidence and
rendered a finding, the High Court cannot re-appreciate the evidence just because another view is
possible, when the view taken by the First Appellate Court is plausible and does not suffer from vice
in law. When the determination of the High Court is only by way of re-appreciation of the existing
evidence, without there being any legal question to be answered, it would be axiomatic that not even
a question of law is involved, much less a substantial one. It will be useful to refer to another
judgment of this Court in Chandrabhan (Deceased) through L.Rs & Ors. v. Saraswati & Ors.11,
wherein it was held as follows:
“33. The principles relating to Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure relevant for
this case may be summarised thus:
(i) An inference of fact from the recitals or contents of a document is a question of
fact. But the legal effect of the terms of a document is a question of law.
Construction of a document involving the application of any principle of law, is also a question of
law. Therefore, when there is misconstruction of a document or wrong application of a principle of
law in construing a document, it gives rise to a question of law.
(ii) The High Court should be satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law, and not a
mere question of law. A question of law having a material bearing on the decision of the case (that is,
a question, answer to which affects the rights of parties to the suit) will be a substantial question of
law, if it is not covered by any specific provisions of law or settled legal principle emerging from
binding precedents and involves a debatable legal issue. A substantial question of law will also arise
in a contrary situation, where the legal position is clear, either on account of express provisions of
law or binding precedents, but the court below has decided the matter, either ignoring or acting
contrary to such legal principle. In the second type of cases, the substantial question of law arises
not because the law is still debatable, but because the decision rendered on a material question,
violates the settled position of law.
MANU/SC/1224/2022: 2022 INSC 997
(iii) The general Rule is that the High Court will not interfere with findings of facts arrived at by the
courts below. But it is not an absolute rule. Some of the well-recognised exceptions are where (i) the
courts below have ignored material evidence or acted on no evidence; (ii) the courts have drawn
wrong inferences from proved facts by applying the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts have wrongly
cast the burden of proof. When we refer to "decision based on no evidence", it not only refers to
cases where there is a total dearth of evidence, but also refers to any case, where the evidence, taken
as a whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding.
34. In this case, it cannot be said that the First Appellate Court acted on no evidence. The
Respondents in their Second Appeal before the High Court did not advert to any material evidence
that had been ignored by the First Appellate Court. The Respondents also could not show that any
wrong inference had been drawn by the First Appellate Court from proved facts by applying the law
erroneously.
35. In this case, as observed above, evidence had been adduced on behalf of the Original Plaintiff as
well as the Defendants. The First Appellate Court analysed the evidence carefully and in effect found
that the Trial Court had erred in its analysis of evidence and given undue importance to
discrepancies and inconsistencies, which were not really material, overlooking the time gap of 34
years that had elapsed since the date of the adoption. There was no such infirmity in the reasoning
of the First Appellate Court which called for interference.
36. Right of appeal is not automatic. Right of appeal is conferred by statute. When statute confers a
limited right of appeal restricted only to cases which involve substantial questions of law, it is not
open to this Court to sit in appeal over the factual findings arrived at by the First Appellate Court.”
12.2. In the present case, the First Appellate Court analyzed the entire oral evidence adduced by
both parties, as well as the documentary evidence relied upon by either side, and dismissed the suit.
The authority to re-consider the evidence is available only to the First Appellate Court under Section
96 and not to the High Court in exercise of its authority under Section 100, unless the case falls
under the exceptional circumstances provided under Section 103. While so, the re-appreciation of
the entire evidence, including the contents of the exhibits, reliance on and wrongful identification of
a different property and treating the same to be the suit property actually in dispute to prescribe
another view without any substantial question of law, only illustrate the callousness of the High
Court in applying the settled principles. Therefore, the High Court erred in setting aside the
judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court.
13. Further, it is a settled principle of law that there is no presumption of a property being joint
family property only on account of existence of a joint Hindu family. The one who asserts has to
prove that the property is a joint family property. If, however, the person so asserting proves that
there was nucleus with which the joint family property could be acquired, then there would be
presumption of the property being joint and the onus would shift on the person who claims it to be
self-acquired property to prove that he purchased the property with his own funds and not out of
joint family nucleus that was available. That apart, while considering the term ‘nucleus’ it should
always be borne in mind that such nucleus has to be established as a matter of fact and the existence
of such nucleus cannot normally be presumed or assumed on probabilities. This Court in R.Deivanai
Ammal (Died) v. G. Meenakshi Ammal12, dealt with the concept of Hindu Law, ancestral property
and the nucleus existing therein. The relevant paragraphs are extracted below for ready reference:
AIR 2004 MADRAS 529 “13. First let us consider the nature of the suit properties,
namely, self-acquired properties of late Ganapathy Moopanar or ancestral properties
and whether any nucleus was available to purchase the properties. Under the Hindu
Law it is only when a person alleging that the property is ancestral property proves
that there was a nucleus by means of which other property may have been acquired,
that the burden is shifted on the party alleging self-acquisitions to prove that the
property was acquired without any aid from the family estate. In other words the
mere existence of a nucleus however small or insignificant is not enough. It should be
shown to be of such a character as could reasonably be expected to lead to the
acquisition of the property alleged to be part of the joint family property. Where the
doctrine of blending is invoked against a person having income at his disposal and
acquiring property, the reasonable presumption to make is that he had the income at
his absolute disposal unless there is evidence to the contrary. If a coparcener desires
to establish that a property in the name of a female member of the family or in the
name of the manager himself has to be accepted and treated as property acquired
from the joint family nucleus, it is absolutely essential that such a coparcener should
not only barely plead the same, but also establish the existence of such a joint family
fund or nucleus. Even if the joint family nucleus is so established, the prescription
that the accretions made by the manager or the purchases made by him should be
deemed to be from and out of such a nucleus does not arise, if there is no proof that
such nucleus of the joint family is not an income-yielding apparatus. The proof
required is very strict and the burden is on the person who sets up a case that the
property in the name of a female member of the family or in the name of the manager
or any other coparcener is to be treated as joint family property. There should be
proof of the availability of such surplus income or joint family nucleus on the date of
such acquisitions or purchases. The same is the principle even in the cases where
moneys were advanced on mortgages over immoveable properties. The onus is not on
the acquirer to prove that the property standing in his name was purchased from
joint family funds. That may be so, in the case of a manager of a joint family, but not
so in the case of all coparceners. For a greater reason it is not so in the case of female
members.
14.The doctrine of blending of self-acquired property with joint family has to be carefully applied
with reference to the facts of each case. No doubt it is settled that when members of a joint family by
their joint labour or in their joint business acquired property, that property, in the absence of a clear
indication of a contrary intention, would be owned by them as joint family property and their male
issues would necessarily acquire a right by birth in such property. But the essential sine qua non is
the absence of a contrary intention. If there is satisfactory evidence of an intention on the part of the
acquirer such property to treat it as his own, but not as joint family property, the presumption which
ordinarily arises, according to the personal law of Hindus that such property would be regarded as
joint family property, will not arise.
15.It is a well-established principle of law that where a party claims that any particular item of
property is joint family property, the burden of proving that it is so rests on the party asserting it.
Where it is established or admitted that the family possessed some joint property which from its
nature and relative value may have formed the nucleus from which the property in question may
have been acquired, the presumption arises that it was joint property and the burden shifts to the
party alleging self-acquisition to establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the
aid of the joint family. But no such presumption would arise if the nucleus is such that with its help
the property claimed to be joint could not have been acquired. In order to give rise to the
presumption, the nucleus should be such that with its help the property claimed to be joint could
have been acquired. A family house in the occupation of the members and yielding no income could
not be nucleus out of which acquisitions could be made even though it might be of considerable
value.
16.In a Hindu joint family, if one member sues for partition on the foot that the properties claimed
by him are joint family properties then three circumstances ordinarily arise. The first is an admitted
case when there is no dispute about the existence of the joint family properties at all. The second is a
case where certain properties are admitted to the joint family properties and the other properties in
which a share is claimed are alleged to be the accretions or acquisitions from the income available
from joint family properties or in the alternative have been acquired by a sale or conversion of such
available properties. The third head is that the properties standing in the names of female members
of the family are benami and that such a state of affairs has been deliberately created by the
manager or the head of the family and that really the properties or the amounts standing in the
names of female members are properties of the joint family. While considering the term ‘nucleus’ it
should always be borne in mind that such nucleus has to be established as a matter of fact and the
existence of such nucleus cannot normally be presumed or assumed on probabilities. The extent of
the property, the income from the property, the normal liability with which such income would be
charged and the net available surplus of such joint family property do all enter into computation for
the purpose of assessing the content of the reservoir of such a nucleus from which alone it could,
with reasonable certainty, be said that the other joint family properties have been purchased unless
a strong link or nexus is established between the available surplus income and the alleged joint
family properties. The person who comes to Court with such bare allegations without any
substantial proof to back it up should fail.
17.It is also a well-established doctrine of Hindu Law that property which was originally
self-acquired may become joint property if it has been voluntarily thrown by the coparcener into the
joint stock with the intention of abandoning all separate claims upto it. But the question whether the
coparcener has done so or not is entirely a question of fact to be decided in the light of all the
circumstances of the case. It must be established that there was a clear intention on the part of the
coparcener to waive his separate rights and such an intention will not be inferred from acts which
may have been done from kindness or affection. The important point to keep in mind is that the
separate property of a Hindu coparcener ceases to be his separate property and acquires the
characteristics of his joint family or ancestral property, not by mere act of physical mixing with his
joint family or ancestral property, but by his own volition and intention by his waiving or
surrendering his special right in it as separate property. Such intention can be discovered only from
his words or from his acts and conduct.”
14. It is also to be noted that in Hindu law, for a property to be considered as an ancestral property,
it has to be inherited from any of the paternal ancestors up to three generations. In this regard, it
would be appropriate to refer to the judgment of this Court in Govindbhai Chhotabhai Patel & Ors.
v. Patel Ramanbhai Mathurbhai13, wherein it has been held as under:
“18. The learned counsel for the appellants has referred to Shyam Narayan Prasad
[Shyam Narayan Prasad v. Krishna Prasad, (2018) 7 SCC 646 : (2018) 3 SCC (Civ)
702] . That is a case in which the property in question was held to be ancestral
property by the trial court. The plaintiffs therein being sons and grandson of one of
the sons of Gopal Prasad, the last male holder was found to have equal share in the
property. The question examined was whether the property allotted to one of the sons
of Gopal Prasad in partition retains the character of coparcenary property. It was the
said finding which was affirmed by this Court. This Court held as under: (SCC p. 651,
para 12) “12. It is settled that the property inherited by a male Hindu from his father,
father's father or father's father's father is an ancestral property. The essential feature
of ancestral property, according to Mitakshara law, is that the sons, grandsons, and
great grandsons of the person who inherits it, acquire an interest and the rights
attached to such property at the moment of their birth.
The share which a coparcener obtains on partition of ancestral property is (2020) 16 SCC 255
ancestral property as regards his male issue. After partition, the property in the hands of the son will
continue to be the ancestral property and the natural or adopted son of that son will take interest in
it and is entitled to it by survivorship.” … … … …
20. In view of the undisputed fact, that Ashabhai Patel purchased the property, therefore, he was
competent to execute the will in favour of any person. Since the beneficiary of the will was his son
and in the absence of any intention in the will, beneficiary would acquire the property as
self-acquired property in terms of C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar case [C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar v. C.A.
Muruganatha Mudaliar, (1953) 2 SCC 362 : 1954 SCR 243 :
AIR 1953 SC 495]. The burden of proof that the property was ancestral was on the
plaintiffs alone. It was for them to prove that the will of Ashabhai intended to convey
the property for the benefit of the family so as to be treated as ancestral property. In
the absence of any such averment or proof, the property in the hands of donor has to
be treated as self-acquired property. Once the property in the hands of donor is held
to be self-acquired property, he was competent to deal with his property in such a
manner he considers as proper including by executing a gift deed in favour of a
stranger to the family.”
15. With regard to coparcenary property, the principle laid down by this Court in
Rohit Chauhan v. Surinder Singh & Ors.14 would be relevant as follows:
“11. ….In our opinion coparcenary property means the property which consists of
ancestral property and a coparcener would mean a person who shares equally with
others in inheritance in the estate of common ancestor. Coparcenary is a narrower
body than the joint Hindu family and before the commencement of the Hindu
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, only male members of the family used to
acquire by birth an interest in the coparcenary property. A coparcener has no definite
share in the coparcenary property but he has an undivided interest in it and one has
to bear in mind that it enlarges by deaths and diminishes by births in the family. It is
not static. We are further of the opinion that so long, on partition an ancestral
property remains in the hand of a single person, it has to be treated as a separate
property and such a person shall be entitled to dispose of the coparcenary property
treating it to be his separate property but if a son is subsequently born, the alienation
made before the birth cannot be questioned. But, the moment a son is born, the
(2013) 9 SCC 419 property becomes a coparcenary property and the son would
acquire interest in that and become a coparcener.
12.The view which we have taken finds support from a judgment of this Court in M. Yogendra v.
Leelamma N. [(2009) 15 SCC 184 : (2009) 5 SCC (Civ) 602] in which it has been held as follows:
(SCC p. 192, para 29) “29. It is now well settled in view of several decisions of this Court that the
property in the hands of a sole coparcener allotted to him in partition shall be his separate property
for the same shall revive only when a son is born to him. It is one thing to say that the property
remains a coparcenary property but it is another thing to say that it revives. The distinction between
the two is absolutely clear and unambiguous. In the case of former any sale or alienation which has
been done by the sole survivor coparcener shall be valid whereas in the case of a coparcener any
alienation made by the karta would be valid.” … … … … …
14.A person, who for the time being is the sole surviving coparcener as in the present case Gulab
Singh was, before the birth of the plaintiff, was entitled to dispose of the coparcenary property as if
it were his separate property. Gulab Singh, till the birth of plaintiff Rohit Chauhan, was competent
to sell, mortgage and deal with the property as his property in the manner he liked. Had he done so
before the birth of plaintiff, Rohit Chauhan, he was not competent to object to the alienation made
by his father before he was born or begotten. But, in the present case, it is an admitted position that
the property which Defendant 2 got on partition was an ancestral property and till the birth of the
plaintiff he was the sole surviving coparcener but the moment plaintiff was born, he got a share in
the father's property and became a coparcener. As observed earlier, in view of the settled legal
position, the property in the hands of Defendant 2 allotted to him in partition was a separate
property till the birth of the plaintiff and, therefore, after his birth Defendant 2 could have alienated
the property only as karta for legal necessity. It is nobody's case that Defendant 2 executed the sale
deeds and release deed as karta for any legal necessity. Hence, the sale deeds and the release deed
executed by Gulab Singh to the extent of entire coparcenary property are illegal, null and void.
However, in respect of the property which would have fallen in the share of Gulab Singh at the time
of execution of sale deeds and release deed, the parties can work out their remedies in appropriate
proceeding.”
16. In the instant case, the plaintiffs raised a specific plea throughout the proceedings that the suit
property was purchased by Defendant No.1 using family nucleus viz., income derived from the lands
allotted to the share of Defendant No.1; income derived from doing coolie work; cash of Rs.10,000/-
received at the time of partition; and cash received from Mallamma (grandmother of the
respondents) who sold her property at Rayadurga and therefore, the suit property should be treated
as ancestral and the plaintiffs, who were co-parceners, have a right in it.
17. It cannot be disputed that the properties divided among Defendant No.1 and his brothers
through partition deed dated 09.05.1986, are joint family properties. However, as per Hindu law,
after partition, each party gets a separate and distinct share and this share becomes their
self-acquired property and they have absolute rights over it and they can sell, transfer, or bequeath it
as they wish. Accordingly, the properties bequeathed through partition, become the self- acquired
properties of the respective sharers.
18. Apparently, the plaintiffs did not question the partition deed (Ex. P1) effected among the
brothers. It states that the respective parties shall hereinafter enjoy the properties allotted to their
share with a right to sell, lease, gift, encumber, etc. The partition deed further reveals that the suit
property was allotted to C. Thippeswamy, one of the brothers of Defendant No.1; and Defendant
No.1 was allotted 10 acres of land, which was different from the suit property measuring 7 acres 20
Guntas allotted to the said C. Thippeswamy. It also proceeds to state that after the death of the
father Channappa, the joint family became unmanageable due to difference of opinion among the
members and therefore, they decided that it was not good to stay together and partitioned the lands
allotted to them. Thus, the intention of the parties and the recitals in the partition deed establish
that the parties wanted to go their separate ways and did not want the property to remain as joint
family property.
19. As reiterated above, after the joint family property has been distributed in accordance with law,
it ceases to be joint family properties and the shares of the respective parties become their
self-acquired properties. Hence, the suit property acquired by Defendant No.1 became his
self-acquired property, on being sold by his brother Thippeswamy to him, vide sale deed dated
16.10.1989. It is the contention of the plaintiffs that the suit property was purchased by Defendant
No.1 using family nucleus and thus, should be considered as ancestral property. Whereas, the
defence raised was that Defendant No.1 acquired the suit property with the aid of his own funds and
loan obtained from DW3- Narasimhamurthy. DW1- Chandrashekar clearly stated in his deposition
that Defendant No.1 obtained a loan from DW3, out of which, he purchased the suit property and
that he repaid the loan amount through a sale deed executed in respect of 4 acres of land to DW3
and out of the balance amount, he performed his daughter’s marriage. It was also stated by DW1
that apart from the suit property, Defendant No.1 had various lands and a house as well. DW2
Lakshmanappa stated in his evidence that he had signed the partition deed (Ex. P1) executed among
Defendant No.1 and his brothers in 1986; and he denied the payment of Rs.10,000/- to the share of
Defendant No.1. He further deposed that Thippeswamy, elder brother of Defendant No.1, residing in
Bangalore, sold his share to Defendant No.1 as he was unable to look after the same. His evidence
also establishes that Defendant No.1 obtained loan from DW3 and he sold his land to him for
repayment of the said loan in 1993 by executing a sale deed (Ex. D1), in which, DW2 was a witness;
and at that time, the wife and children of Defendant No.1 were present. DW3 - Narasimhamurthy in
his evidence, stated that Defendant No.1 obtained loan from him for purchase of land of his brother,
in October 1989 and he repaid the same by selling his 4 acres of land to him in 1993; and at the time
of execution of sale deed by Defendant No.1 to DW3, his wife and children were present. It is the
evidence of DW4 - Linganna that Defendant No.1 executed a sale deed in favour of DW3 in respect
of 4 acres of land, for the repayment of loan borrowed by him and DW4 was the witness to the said
document. He also categorically stated that Defendant No.1 had purchased about 7 acres of land,
after obtaining loan from DW3 and prior to the execution of sale deed in favour of DW3. It is
categorically stated in the sale deed dated 11.03.1993 that the suit property was a self-acquired
property of Defendant No.1. The sale deed (Ex.P2) does not anywhere disclose that the suit property
purchased by Defendant No.1 was ancestral property or was purchased from the income received
from the joint family property, except for a mere reference to the partition deed (Ex. P1), which
according to us, is not sufficient to come to a conclusion that the properties allotted to the share of
Defendant No.1 should also be treated as joint family properties, and no evidence was let in by the
plaintiffs to prove that the other properties allotted to Defendant No.1 yielded income and that it
was only from that entire income that the suit property was purchased. No records have been
produced in this regard. Though PW2 stated that during the partition, all the three brothers were
allotted Rs.10,000/- each, there was no recital to that effect in the partition deed (Ex. P1) and hence,
it cannot be believed. It is well established that the contents in a document would prevail over any
contrary oral evidence. Regarding the contention that Mallamma had sold her property in order to
help Defendant No.1 to purchase the suit property, except the statement of PW2, there is no
evidence in this regard. Further, the said Mallamma was not examined and the sale deed executed
by her was not produced to substantiate the same. It is also clear from the depositions on the
defendants’ side that Defendant No.1 was not having any bad habits and his wife and children were
present, at the time of execution of the sale deed. Whereas, there were inconsistencies in the
statements of PW1 and PW2 in demonstrating that the suit property was an ancestral property. The
mere existence of sons and daughters in a joint Hindu family does not make the father's separate or
self- acquired property as joint family property. It was also the claim of the defendants that
Defendant No.1 performed the marriage of his daughter with the funds received as sale
consideration, which according to us, is the role of a Kartha, and therefore, has to be treated as act of
necessity and duty. This fact has not been objected to by the plaintiffs.
19.1. It is also to be mentioned here that when the income derived from the joint family property or
when a joint family property is sold and the sale consideration is utilised for maintenance and
education within the joint family, the same are to be treated as out of necessity as it is the duty of
every Kartha to do so. Hence, it is sufficient to satisfy the legal necessity if the Kartha had sold the
property and used the funds for upbringing the children. That apart, under the customary practices
and tradition in this country, it is the father who performs the marriage of his children and
therefore, the expenses incurred for that purposes are also to be treated as expenses out of necessity.
19.2. At the cost of repetition, the property in dispute is the property purchased by Defendant No.1
from his brother C. Thippeswamy. The High Court rather than ascertaining as to how this property
was acquired, it erroneously went into a fact- finding inquiry in the Second Appeal regarding the
property received by Defendant No.1 under a Will, a narration of which is found in the recital of the
partition deed. The High Court even failed to notice that the partition took place in 1986, whereas,
the suit property was purchased only in 1989. This deviation, in our view, has further contributed to
the miscarriage of justice. That apart, the High Court ought not to have relied upon disproved
circumstances claimed by the plaintiffs against Defendant No.1 alleging that he alienated another
property to presume that the suit property was also sold under similar circumstances. In fact, the
said sales were not challenged by the plaintiffs. Thus, taking note of the facts and circumstances of
the case and also the principles enunciated in the above decisions, in our considered opinion,
Defendant No.1 acquired the suit property out of the loan obtained from DW3 and not from the
income derived from the nucleus funds or joint family funds, and hence, the suit property should be
considered as his self-acquired property. As such, Defendant No.1 has the right to sell the suit
property and accordingly, the sale deed executed by him in favour of Defendant No.2 is perfectly
valid. That apart, the evidence on record also displays that the object of the sale of the suit property
was for the benefit of the family and therefore, we also disagree with the findings of the High Court
on this aspect.
20. Regarding the doctrine of blending of self-acquired property with joint family, it is settled law
that property separate or self- acquired of a member of joint Hindu family may be impressed with
the character of joint family property if it is voluntarily thrown by the owner into the common stock
with the intention of abandoning his separate claim therein but to establish such abandonment a
clear intention to waive separate rights must be established. From the mere fact that other members
of the family were allowed to use the property jointly with himself, or that the income of the separate
property was utilized out of generosity to support persons whom the holder was either bound or not
bound to support, or from the failure to maintain separate accounts, abandonment cannot be
inferred, for an act of generosity or kindness, will not ordinarily be regarded as an admission of a
legal obligation [See: Lakkireddi Chinna Venkata Reddy & Ors. v. Lakkireddi Lakshamama15 and
K.V. Narayanan v. K.V.Ranganandhan & Ors.16]. In the present case, this question does not arise, as
the suit property, which was purchased from C. Thippeswamy by Defendant No.1, is different from
the property which is said to have been received by Defendant No.1 through a Will that allegedly
blended with the joint family property. The plaintiffs have not adduced any evidence to show that
the property received through the Will, blended with the joint family properties and that income was
received from that property, which was utilized to purchase the suit property. There is no finding on
this aspect by the High Court as well. On the other hand, as stated above, we are satisfied with the
evidence on record that the suit property is a self-acquired property. However, the High Court
erroneously applied the doctrine of blending under the Hindu joint family law by relying upon
judgments that are not applicable to the case on hand, re-appreciated evidence without framing any
substantial question of law and allowed the 1964 (2) SCR 172 (1977) 1 SCC 244 appeal filed by the
plaintiffs. This, according to us, is not sustainable for the aforesaid reasons.
21. In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set
aside, and the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court is restored. Accordingly, this appeal
stands allowed. The parties shall bear their own costs.
22. Connected Miscellaneous Application(s) shall stand disposed of.
..............................J. [J.B. Pardiwala] ..............................J. [R. Mahadevan] NEW DELHI;
APRIL 22, 2025.