Anna Waman Bhalerao vs State Of Maharashtra on 12
September, 2025
2025 INSC 1114
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
Criminal Appeal No. 4004 of 2025
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 11128 of 2025)
ANNA WAMAN BHALERAO … APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA … RESPONDENT(S
WITH
Criminal Appeal No. 4005 of 2025
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 11108 of 2025)
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted in both the SLPs.
2. Both these criminal appeals arise from a common judgment dated 04.07.2025 passed by the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay 1 in Anticipatory Bail Application Nos.1790 of 2019 and 1844 of
2019, whereby the appellants’ applications seeking pre-arrest bail in connection with F.I.R. No.
30/2019, came to be dismissed.
Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
3. Based on a complaint lodged by one Vikas Narsingh Vartak, FIR No. 30/2019 was registered on
26.01.2019 at Arnala Sagari Police Station, District Palghar, Maharashtra against Mahesh Yashwant
Bhoir and others, for offences punishable under Sections 420, 463, 464, 465, 467, 468, 471 and 474
read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602.
3.1. In the complaint, it was alleged that the complainant’s father, Narsingh Govind Vartak died on
29.01.1978. Out of his five brothers, four had died, and one Harihar Govind Vartak was still alive. It
was further alleged that the land bearing Survey No. 29, Hissa No. 1 (Old) and Survey No. 233, Hissa
No.1(A) (New), admeasuring 1.46 hectares situated at Village Agashi, was jointly owned by Narsingh
Govind Vartak, Hari Govind Vartak, Mahadev Govind Vartak, Parshuram Govind Vartak,
Raghunandan Govind Vartak, Harihar Govind Vartak, along with Purushottam Manohardas Shah,
Amrutlal Manohardas Shah, and Kantilal Manohardas Shah, and their names stood recorded in the
revenue records.
3.2. On 13.05.1996, a Power of Attorney was purportedly executed in favour of Vijay Anant Patil
(A2) by Narsingh Govind Vartak, and his brothers, and another Power of Attorney was executed in
favour of Rajesh Kamat (A3) by the Shahs. On the strength of these Powers of Attorney, on
18.05.1996, a sale deed was For short, “IPC” executed by A2 and A3 in favour of Mahesh Yashwant
Bhoir (A1) for a consideration of Rs.8 lakhs. Mutation Entry Nos. 15177 and 15180 were recorded in
1996 on the basis of this sale deed.
3.3. At the relevant point of time, the present appellants were serving as Circle Officer and Talathi
respectively in the Revenue Department of the State of Maharashtra. Subsequently, a revision
application was filed before the Sub- Divisional Officer, Bhiwandi seeking cancellation of the said
mutation entries, and by order dated 30.09.1998, Mutation Entry Nos. 15177 and 15180 were
accordingly cancelled.
4. The appellants were not initially named in the FIR. They were later arraigned as Accused Nos. 5
and 6 on allegations that, in their official capacity, they had certified the said mutation entries on the
basis of forged documents, thereby facilitating the illegal transfer of ownership of the immovable
property. Apprehending arrest, they preferred Anticipatory Bail Application Nos.561 and 562 of
2019 before the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, Vasai3. By order dated 06.06.2019, the
Sessions Court granted interim protection to them. However, upon hearing both sides, the Sessions
Court, by order dated 21.06.2019, rejected their applications. Aggrieved, the appellants approached
the High Court by filing Anticipatory Bail Application Nos. 1790 and 1844 of 2019, in which, interim
protection was granted from time to time. Finally, by the impugned For short, “the Sessions Court”
judgment dated 04.07.2025, the High Court rejected the anticipatory bail applications, but granted
interim protection for a period of four week, which expired on 01.08.2025. Thereafter, the
appellants have preferred the present appeals before this Court.
5. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that the appellants were
originally not named in the subject F.I.R and there is a prima facie case for grant of anticipatory bail
in their favour. On 16.08.2019 and 22.08.2019, the High Court granted interim protection, which
was periodically extended and lastly continued by the impugned order dated 04.07.2025 for a
further period of four weeks, expiring on 01.08.2025.
5.1. It was contended that the appellants, who were serving as Circle Officer and Talathi respectively
at the relevant time and have since retired, acted purely in their official capacity while certifying
mutation entries on the basis of a registered sale deed presented before them. They had no role in
the creation or execution of the alleged forged powers of attorney or sale deed, nor any direct link
with the subsequent transfer in favour of A1. There is also no allegation of personal gain, dishonest
intention, or conspiracy. The only act attributed to them is certification of mutation entries on the
strength of facially valid documents. 5.2. It was urged that in the absence of material to show
knowledge of forgery, dishonest inducement, or collusion, the essential ingredients of the offences
under Sections 420, 463, 467, 468, and 471 IPC are not attracted. Mere administrative
endorsement, without fraudulent intent, cannot amount to cheating or forgery. The appellants
neither created nor used forged documents, nor induced any person to part with property. At best,
the allegations, even if taken at face value, may constitute a procedural lapse in discharge of official
duties, which does not give rise to criminal liability.
5.3. Learned Senior Counsel pointed out that the very mutation entries in question (Nos. 15177 and
15180) had been cancelled by the Sub-Divisional Officer as far back as 30.09.1998. Once annulled by
a competent authority, those entries stood nullified ab initio, leaving no continuing illegality or
consequence. Thus, no enduring wrongful gain or loss can be attributed to the appellants. 5.4. It was
further submitted that the FIR was lodged after an unexplained delay of over 20 years from the
alleged incident of 1996. The complainant, being aware of the cancellation in 1998, remained silent
for two decades. Such extraordinary delay gravely prejudices the appellants’ right to a fair
investigation and defence, particularly as the allegations relate to administrative acts performed in
official capacity long ago. The delay undermines the credibility of the prosecution’s case. 5.5. It was
also urged that the entire case rests on documentary evidence already in existence. Custodial
interrogation of the appellants, retired government officers with no criminal antecedents, is neither
necessary nor justified. Furthermore, they are willing to cooperate with the investigation and
furnish all documents as required.
5.6. In support, reliance was placed on Siddaram Satlingappa Mehtre v. State of Maharashtra4,
wherein this Court emphasised that anticipatory bail is intended to protect personal liberty where
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the accused will neither abscond nor misuse the
concession of bail. 5.7. Accordingly, it was contended that the appellants have been falsely
implicated, that no offence is made out on the basis of the FIR or the material on record, and that
custodial arrest would serve no purpose. Without considering these factors, the High Court erred in
rejecting the applications for anticipatory bail. Therefore, the impugned judgment deserves to be set
aside and the appeals be allowed.
6. We have heard the submissions of the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants and
perused the record.
7. It appears that the original owners of the subject property, namely the Shahs and the Vartaks, had
expired between 1969 and 1990. Nevertheless, powers of attorney were purportedly executed in the
names of the deceased persons, on the basis of which a sale deed dated 18.05.1996 came to be
executed in favour of Mahesh Yashwant Bhoir (A1). Relying on the said sale deed, the mutation
entries were certified by the appellants (A5 and A6).
(2011) 1 SCC 694
8. The FIR pertains to events of 1996-98 and the allegation against the appellants is that, on the
strength of forged and fabricated documents, fraudulent entries were made in the mutation register,
facilitating the illegal transfer of ownership. Initially, their names did not find place in the FIR,
however, they were subsequently, arraigned as A5 and A5. At the relevant point of time, the
appellants were serving as Circle Officer and Talathi, and they retired from service in 2013 and 2019
respectively. The FIR itself was lodged after a delay of more than 20 years from the alleged incident,
and no departmental proceedings were initiated against the appellants either during their service or
after retirement. It is not in dispute that their anticipatory bail applications remained pending
before the High Court from 2019, and were finally dismissed by the impugned judgment dated
04.07.2025, though they continued to enjoy interim protection until 01.08.2025. It is also
undisputed that the mutation entries certified by the appellants had already been cancelled by the
Sub-Divisional Officer on 30.09.1998.
9. The principal contention advanced on behalf of the appellants is that the prosecution is vitiated by
extraordinary and unexplained delay. The complainant, having knowledge of the cancellation as
early as 1998, remained silent for two decades. By the time, FIR No. 30 of 2019 was lodged on
26.01.2019, the mutation entries stood annulled, leaving no subsisting illegality or wrongful gain. It
was urged that the only role attributed to the appellants is certification of mutation entries in their
official capacity, based on documents that appeared facially valid. They had no involvement in the
creation or execution of the alleged forged powers of attorney or sale deed, nor did they derive any
personal benefit or act in collusion with the co-accused. The appellants retired with unblemished
records, and there are no criminal antecedents against them.
10. It was the contention of the State before the High Court that A1 was the direct beneficiary of the
fraudulent transaction founded upon forged powers of attorney. The appellants (A5 and A6), instead
of adhering to their statutory obligations under Section 15(2) of the Maharashtra Land Revenue
Code, certified the mutation entries thereby facilitating the transfer of immovable property. It was
further alleged that despite enjoying interim protection since 2019, the appellants failed to
cooperate with the investigation and prolonged the proceedings.
11. We find that the High Court rightly noted that the alleged powers of attorney were executed in
1996 long after the death of the original owners and that the sale deed dated 18.05.1996 executed on
the strength of such documents, is prima facie vitiated, with A1 appearing to be the direct
beneficiary of such a transaction. The High Court further observed that the appellants, while serving
in the Revenue Department, ignored their statutory duties and facilitated the mutation in favour of
A1, and hence, their conduct cannot be brushed aside as a mere procedural lapse.
12. We are conscious of the fact that whether the appellants shared any criminal intent or abetted
the acts of A1 is a matter for trial, and any conclusive finding at this stage would be inappropriate.
However, while considering anticipatory bail, this Court must balance the liberty of individuals
against the legitimate requirements of investigation.
13. The plea that the mutation entries were cancelled in 1998, though noted, does not efface the
appellants’ alleged role in certifying those entries in the first place – a matter that must be
adjudicated at trial.
14. Although there has been a long delay in the initiation of proceedings, the gravity of the
allegations, the alleged abuse of official position, and the prima facie findings of the High Court that
custodial interrogation is necessary, cannot be diluted merely on the ground of delay. Even in a case
based largely on documentary evidence, custodial interrogation may be essential to trace the chain
of transactions, ascertain complicity, and prevent further suppression or tampering of records.
Moreover, the appellants, despite enjoying interim protection for nearly six years, did not extend
due cooperation to the investigation. In these circumstances, we see no reason to interfere with the
judgement under challenge.
15. Apart from the relief of anticipatory bail, a significant issue that arises for consideration herein is
the inordinate delay in the disposal of the appellants’ applications for anticipatory bail by the High
Court. The record discloses that the applications remained pending for several years without any
final adjudication, although interim protection was extended to the appellants from time to time,
including even after the dismissal of the applications, until 01.08.2025. It is true that the appellants
themselves did not suffer prejudice, having continued to enjoy interim protection. Nevertheless, this
Court has consistently underscored, in a long line of decisions, that applications affecting personal
liberty – particularly bail and anticipatory bail – ought not to be kept pending indefinitely. The
grant or refusal of bail, anticipatory or otherwise, is ordinarily a straightforward exercise, turning on
the facts of each case. There is, therefore, no justification for deferring decision-making and
allowing a sword of Damocles to hang over the applicant’s head. In matters concerning liberty, bail
courts must be sensitive and ensure that constitutional ethos is upheld. While docket explosion
remains a chronic challenge, cases involving personal liberty deserve precedence.
16. In this context, we may refer to the following decisions of this Court. In Nikesh Tarachand Shah
v. Union of India5, Justice R. F. Nariman while adverting to the Magna Carta in the context of
pre-arrest bail, observed as under:
“15. The provision for bail goes back to Magna Carta itself. Clause 39, which was, at
that time, written in Latin, is translated as follows:
“No free man shall be seized or imprisoned or stripped of his rights or possessions, or
outlawed or exiled, or deprived of his standing in any other (2018) 11 SCC 1 way, nor
will we proceed with force against him, or send others to do so, except by the lawful
judgment of his equals or by the law of the land.” It is well known that Magna Carta,
which was wrung out of King John by the Barons on 15-6-1215, was annulled by Pope
Innocent III in August of that very year. King John died one year later, leaving the
throne to his 9 year old son, Henry III. It is in the reign of this pious King and his
son, Edward I, that Magna Carta was recognised by kingly authority. In fact, by the
Statutes of Westminster of 1275, King Edward I repeated the injunction contained in
Clause 39 of Magna Carta. However, when it came to the reign of the Stuarts, who
believed that they were kings on earth as a matter of divine right, a struggle ensued
between Parliament and King Charles I. This led to another great milestone in the
history of England called the Petition of Right of 1628. Moved by the hostility to the
Duke of Buckingham, the House of Commons denied King Charles I the means to
conduct military operations abroad. The King was unwilling to give up his military
ambition and resorted to the expedient of a forced loan to finance it. A number of
those subject to the imposition declined to pay, and some were imprisoned; among
them were those who became famous as “the Five Knights”.
Each of them sought a writ of habeas corpus to secure his release. One of the Knights, Sir Thomas
Darnel, gave up the fight, but the other four fought on. The King's Bench, headed by the Chief
Justice, made an order sending the Knights back to prison. The Chief Justice's order was, in fact, a
provisional refusal of bail. Parliament being displeased with this, invoked Magna Carta and the
Statutes of Westminster, and thus it came about that the Petition of Right was presented and
adopted by the Lords and a reluctant King. Charles I reluctantly accepted this Petition of Right
stating, “let right be done as is desired by the petition”. Among other things, the petition had prayed
that no free man should be imprisoned or detained, except by authority of law.
16. In Bushell's case [Bushell's case, 1670 Vaughan 135 : 124 ER 1006] , decided in 1670, Sir John
Vaughan, C.J. was able to state that : (ER p. 1007) “The writ of habeas corpus is now the most usual
remedy by which a man is restored again to his liberty, if he have been against law deprived of it.”
Despite this statement of the law, one Jenkes was arrested and imprisoned for inciting persons to
riot in a speech, asking that King Charles II be petitioned to call a new Parliament. Jenkes went from
pillar to post in order to be admitted to bail. The Lord Chief Justice sent him to the Lord Chancellor,
who, in turn, sent him to the Lord Treasurer, who sent him to the King himself, who, “immediately
commanded that the laws should have their due course”. (See Jenke's case [Jenke's case, (1676) 6
How St Tr 1189] , How St Tr at pp. 1207 & 1208). It is cases like these that led to the next great
milestone of English history, namely, the Habeas Corpus Act, 1679. This Act recited that many of the
King's subjects have been long detained in prison in cases where, by law, they should have been set
free on bail. The Act provided for a habeas corpus procedure which plugged legal loopholes and even
made the King's Bench Judges subject to penalties for non-compliance.
17. The next great milestone in English history is the Bill of Rights, 1689, which was accepted by the
only Dutch monarch that England ever had, King William III, who reigned jointly with his wife
Queen Mary II. It is in this document that the expression “excessive bail ought not to be required…”
first appears in Chapter 2 Clause 10.
18. What is important to learn from this history is that Clause 39 of the Magna Carta was
subsequently extended to pre-trial imprisonment, so that persons could be enlarged on bail to
secure their attendance for the ensuing trial. It may only be added that one century after the Bill of
Rights, the US Constitution borrowed the language of the Bill of Rights when the principle of habeas
corpus found its way into Article 1 Section 9 of the US Constitution, followed by the Eighth
Amendment to the Constitution which expressly states that, “excessive bail shall not be required,
nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted”. We may only add that
the Eighth Amendment has been read into Article 21 by a Division Bench of this Court in Rajesh
Kumar v. State [Rajesh Kumar v. State, (2011) 13 SCC 706 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 836] at paras 60 and
61.” 16.1. In Rajesh Seth v State of Chhattisgarh6, the petitioner filed an application under Section
438 Cr.P.C seeking anticipatory bail, along with an I.A. seeking ex-parte ad-interim protection. On
17.01.2022, while admitting the application, the High Court directed it to be listed for final hearing
‘in due course’. Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner approached this court contending that till date, the
matter had neither been listed for hearing nor any order passed on the plea for interim protection
during the pendency of the anticipatory bail application. This Court observed as under:
“When a person is before the Court and that too in a matter involving personal
liberty, least what is expected is for such a person to be given the result one way or
the other, based on the merit of his case and not push him to a position of uncertainty
or be condemned without being heard, when it matters.
SLP (Crl) 1247/2022 When an application for anticipatory bail was listed before the
learned Single Judge, which was also accompanied by an application for ad-interim
relief, the learned Judge should have decided the same one way or the other, so far as
the ad-interim prayer or should have taken up for consideration after giving some
reasonable time to the State. Even if admitted, the learned Judge should have listed
the same for final disposal on a specific date, keeping in view the nature of relief
sought in the matter. Not giving any specific date, particularly in a matter relating to
anticipatory bail, is not a procedure which can be countenanced. We are of the
considered view that this type of indefinite adjournment in a matter relating to
anticipatory bail, that too after admitting it, is detrimental to the valuable right of a
person.” 16.2. In Sanjay v. The State (NCT of Delhi) & another7, the application for
bail was filed on 24.05.2022, but was posted to 31.08.2022 without granting any
interim protection. Taking note of this circumstance, this Court held as under:
“We are of the considered view that in a matter involving personal liberty, the Court
is expected to pass orders in one way or other taking into account the merits of the
matter at the earliest.” …..
“At any rate, posting an application for anticipatory bail after a couple of months
cannot be appreciated.” 16.3. In Rajanti Devi v. Union of India8, this Court noted that
the Patna High Court had heard the anticipatory bail application and reserved
judgment on 07.04.2022. However, the judgment came to be delivered only on
04.04.2023.
Thus, the matter remained pending for nearly one year after the conclusion of arguments. This
Court expressed strong displeasure that an anticipatory bail petition could be kept pending for such
an inordinate period and underscored the 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1595 importance of the expeditious
disposal of bail and anticipatory bail applications. The following paragraphs are apposite in this
regard:
“5. Though, we are very much alive about the magnitude of the bail applications
being filed and heard by the Courts at all levels, we cannot be oblivious to the delay
which takes place in the disposal of the Bail applications. This Court, time and again,
has expressed great concern about the delay taking place in the disposal of the bail
applications and has issued guidelines from time to time.
7. In a recent decision in the case of Satendra Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation and Anr., (2022) 10 SCC 51, this Court has directed to dispose of the
bail applications in two weeks. The said direction read as under: -
“100.11. Bail applications ought to be disposed of within a period of two weeks except
if the provisions mandate otherwise, with the exception being an intervening
application. Applications for anticipatory bail are expected to be disposed of within a
period of six weeks with the exception of any intervening application.”
8. Despite the aforestated guidelines/directions having been issued by this Court
from time to time, it appears that the cases like the present one, keep on happening
and the bail applications are not being heard expeditiously and if heard, are not being
decided within the stipulated time period.
9. In view of the above, it is directed that all the courts shall scrupulously follow the
directions/ guidelines issued by this Court in the aforestated decisions.” 16.4. In
Sumit Subhaschandra Gangwal & another v. the State of Maharashtra & another9,
this Court while dealing with the issue relating to the inordinate delay in passing the
order, observed as follows:
“6. ...This Court has consistently right from the case of Niranjan Singh and Another v.
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and Others, (1980) 2 SCC 559, held that detailed
elaboration of evidence has to be avoided at the stage of grant/rejection of
bail/anticipatory bail. We do not appreciate such a lengthy elaboration of evidence at
this stage.
7. Another factor that needs to be noted is that though the order was reserved on
25.01.2023, the learned Single Judge of the High Court has pronounced the order on
01.03.2023 i.e. after a period of one month and one week.
8. It is always said that in the matters pertaining to the liberty of citizens, the Court
should act promptly. In our view, such an inordinate delay in passing an order
pertaining to liberty of a citizen is not in tune with the constitutional mandate.” 16.5.
In Kavish Gupta v. State of Chhattisgarh10, this Court had occasion to consider the
interim order passed by a Single Judge of the Chhattisgarh High Court on an
application for anticipatory bail filed by the petitioner – accused in respect of
offences under sections 420, 467, 468, 409, 471 and 34 IPC. By the said order, while
the matter was taken up for consideration and the case diary was also called for,
instead of fixing a specific date for further hearing, the Court directed that the case be
listed “in its chronological order”. The operative observation in the order reads as
follows:
“1. This Court held and reiterated that decisions on anticipatory bail applications /
bail applications, are concerned with the liberty and therefore, shall be taken up and
disposed of, expeditiously. On 21.02.2022 in SLP (Crl) No.1247/2022, a Bench of
three Judges of this Court reiterated the same view. Virtually, this Court deprecated
the practice of admitting the bail applications and thereafter deferring decisions on it
unduly. The case on hand reveals recurrence of such a situation despite the repeated
pronouncements of this Court on very issue. In the case on hand, the petitioner who
is accused No.1 in F.I.R. No.218/2023 of Police Station Vidhan Sabha, Raipur,
Chhattisgarh registered under Section 420 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860. Later, Sections 467, 468, 409 and 471, IPC were also added.
3. The aforestated order would reveal that on 06.12.2023, the matter was taken up for
consideration and after hearing the petitioner, it was admitted and the case Diary was
called for. At the same time, its discernible from the order that the case was not
specifically posted to any date. What was ordered was to list the matter in its
chronological order. When the matter would be placed before the Court for further
consideration, in such circumstances, is nothing but a matter of guess.
SLP (Crl.) no. 16025/2023 with SLP (Crl.) No. 16047/2023
4. We have no hesitation to hold that such an order sans definiteness in the matter relating to
anticipatory bail/regular bail, that too after admitting the matter, would definitely delay due
consideration of the application and such an eventuality will be detrimental to the liberty of a
person. It is taking into account such aspects that this Court held that such matters pertaining to
personal liberty shall be taken up and decided at the earliest. It is a matter of concern that despite
repeated orders, the same situation continues.
5. Hence, we request the learned Single Judge of the High Court to dispose of the pending
anticipatory bail application, pending adjudication before him, on its own merits and in accordance
with law, expeditiously and preferably within a period of four weeks from the receipt/production of
this Order. Till such time, we grant interim protection from arrest to the petitioner.” 16.6. In
Mahatab Ali v. State of West Bengal & Anr.11, the petitioner therein, had been in custody for over
one year and eleven months. The High Court noted that only eight out of 43 charge-sheeted
witnesses had been examined, and that there was no likelihood of the trial concluding in the near
future. The State opposed the bail application, citing the recovery of a gun and six rounds of
ammunition from the petitioner, coupled with forensic evidence linking the ammunition to the
bullet recovered from the body of the deceased. It was further urged that the petitioner’s bail had
been rejected on two earlier occasions. The High Court, however, held that prolonged incarceration
without conclusion of trial amounted to a violation of the accused’s fundamental right to speedy trial
and personal liberty. This Court affirmed the said view, observed as follows:
“When there is a huge filing and pendency of the bail applications, we wonder why
regular bail applications and anticipatory bail applications are being heard by the
Division Bench of this High Court especially when in case of all other High Courts,
the bail matters are being heard by the learned Single Judges. The question is
whether two Hon'ble Judges of the High Court should be devoting time for dealing
with regular bail applications.
SLP (Criminal) Diary No. 60183/2024 We, therefore, direct the Registrar (Judicial)
of the High Court of Calcutta to place on record a report why regular bail
applications/anticipatory bail applications are being heard by the Division Bench. He
is directed to furnish the data of bail applications and anticipatory bail applications
filed in 2024 and pendency of such applications as of today”.
16.7. In Ashok Balwant Patil v. Mohan Madhukar Patil & Ors. Etc.12, the application
for anticipatory bail remained undecided for a period of more than four years. This
Court, taking note of the inordinate delay in considering the application, held as
follows:
“4. We are amazed with the speed in which the application for anticipatory bail is
considered by the High Court of Bombay.
5. Initially, an ad interim anticipatory bail was granted to the respondent(s) accused
on 10.04.2019. The matter came to be adjourned from time to time only observing
that on account of paucity of time, the Court is not in a position to hear the matter.
The only effective order that is passed is on 17.10.2022, on which day the time was
given to the prosecution to place on record the material in support of their case.
6. No doubt, that the liberty of a citizen is a most important factor. However, at the
same time, the consideration of an application for permanent bail on merits is also
necessary. We, therefore, request the High Court to take up the matter expeditiously
and decide the same finally within a period of one month from today.” 16.8. In Amol
Vitthal Vahile v. The State of Maharashtra13, the accused, having remained in
custody for over seven years, preferred a bail application before the Bombay High
Court. The High Court, however, without entering into the merits of the application,
directed the applicant to approach the trial court for bail.
Aggrieved thereby the accused preferred a criminal appeal before this Court. By SLP (Crl.) Diary No.
1540/2024 dated 25.01.2024 a previous order dated 29.01.2024, this Court expressed concern over
the failure of the High Court to exercise its jurisdiction to adjudicate the bail application on merits,
and observed as follows:
“3. Needless to state that Article 21 of the Constitution of India is the soul of the
Constitution as the liberty of a citizen is of paramount importance. Not deciding the
matter pertaining to liberty of a citizen expeditiously and shunting away the matter
on one or the other ground would deprive the party of their precious right guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
4. We have come across various matters from the High Court of Bombay where the
bail/anticipatory bail applications are not being decided expeditiously.
6. We, therefore, request the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court of Bombay
to convey our request to all the learned Judges exercising the criminal jurisdiction to
decide the matter pertaining to bail/anticipatory bail as expeditiously as possible.”
16.9. This Court in Dhanraj Aswani v. Amar S. Mulchandani14 emphasized that
anticipatory bail under section 438 is, inter alia, a remedial provision safeguarding
personal liberty, and traced the evolution of the concept of anticipatory bail in the
following paragraphs:
“D. Analysis
(i) Evolution of the concept of anticipatory bail
23. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (for short “the 1898 Code”) did not contain
any specific provision analogous to Section 438CrPC. In Amir Chand v. Crown [Amir
Chand v. Crown, 1949 SCC OnLine Punj 20], the question before the Full Bench was
whether Section 498 of the 1898 Code empowered the High Court or the Court of
Session to grant bail to a person who had not been placed under restraint by arrest or
otherwise. The Full Bench answered the reference as under: (SCC OnLine Punj) “…
The very notion of bail presupposes some form of previous restraint.
Therefore, bail cannot be granted to a person who has not been arrested and for whose arrest no
warrants have been issued. Section 498, Criminal Procedure Code, does not permit the High Court
or the Court of Session to grant bail to anyone whose case is not covered by Sections 496 and 497,
(2025) 1 SCC (Cri) 1 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2453 : 2024 INSC 669 Criminal Procedure Code. It
follows, therefore, that bail can only be allowed to a person who has been arrested or detained
without warrant or appears or is brought before a court. Such person must be liable to arrest and
must surrender himself before the question of bail can be considered. In the case of a person who is
not under arrest, but for whose arrest warrants have been issued, bail can be allowed if he appears in
Court and surrenders himself. No bail can be allowed to a person at liberty for whose arrest no
warrants have been issued. The petitioners in the present case are, therefore, not entitled to bail.
The question referred to the Full Bench is, therefore, answered in the negative.” (emphasis supplied)
24. Under the 1898 Code, the concept of anticipatory or pre-arrest bail was absent and the need for
introduction of a new provision in CrPC empowering the High Court and Court of Session to grant
anticipatory bail was pointed out by the 41st Law Commission of India in its Report dated
24-9-1969. It observed thus in Para 39.9 of the said Report (Vol. I):
“Anticipatory bail 39.9. The suggestion for directing the release of a person on bail
prior to his arrest (commonly known as “anticipatory bail”) was carefully considered
by us. Though there is a conflict of judicial opinion about the power of a court to
grant anticipatory bail, the majority view is that there is no such power under the
existing provisions of the Code. The necessity for granting anticipatory bail arises
mainly because sometimes influential persons try to implicate their rivals in false
causes for the purpose of disgracing them or for other purposes by getting detained in
jail for some days. In recent times, the accentuation of political rivalry, this tendency
is showing signs of steady increase. Apart from false cases, where there are
reasonable grounds for holding that a person accused of an offence is not likely to
abscond, or otherwise misuse his liberty while on bail, there seems no justification to
require him first to submit to custody, remain in prison for some days and then apply
for bail.” We recommend the acceptance of this suggestion. We are further of the
view that this special power should be conferred only on the High Court and the
Court of Session, and that the order should take effect at the time of arrest or
thereafter.
In order to settle the details of this suggestion, the following draft of a new section is placed for
consideration:
‘497-A. (1) When any person has a reasonable apprehension that he would be
arrested on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply
to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section. That
Court may, in its discretion, direct that in the event of his arrest, he shall be released
on bail.
(2) A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence against that person shall, while
taking steps under Section 204(1), either issue summons or a bailable warrant as
indicated -section (1). (3) If any person in
respect of whom such a direction is made is arrested without warrant by an officer in
charge of a police station on an accusation of having committed that offence, and is
prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer
to give bail, such person shall be released on bail.’ We considered carefully the
question of laying down in the statute certain conditions under which alone
anticipatory bail could be granted. But we found that it may not be practicable to
exhaustively enumerate those conditions; and moreover, the laying down of such
conditions may be construed as prejudging (partially at any rate) the whole case.
Hence we would leave it to the discretion of the court and prefer not to fetter such
discretion in the statutory provision itself. Superior courts will, undoubtedly, exercise
their discretion properly, and not make any observations in the order granting
anticipatory bail which will have a tendency to prejudice the fair trial of the accused.”
(emphasis supplied)
25. The suggestion made by the Law Commission was, in principle, accepted by the Central
Government which introduced Clause 447 in the Draft Bill of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1970
with a view to confer express power on the High Court and the Court of Session to grant anticipatory
bail. The said clause of the Draft Bill was enacted with certain modifications and became Section
438CrPC.
26. The Law Commission, in Para 31 of its 48th Report (1972), made the following comments on the
aforesaid clause:
“31. Point (vi)— Provision for grant of anticipatory bail.—The Bill [CrPC Bill, Cl. 447.]
introduces a provision for the grant of anticipatory bail. This is substantially in
accordance with the recommendation made by the previous Commission [ 41st
Report, Vol. 1, pp. 320-321, Para 39.9.]. We agree that this would be a useful
addition, though we must add that it is in very exceptional cases that such a power
should be exercised.
We are further of the view that in order to ensure that the provision is not put to
abuse at the instance of unscrupulous petitioners, the final order should be made
only after notice to the Public Prosecutor. The initial order should only be an interim
one. Further, the relevant section should make it clear that the direction can be
issued only for reasons to be recorded, and if the court is satisfied that such a
direction is necessary in the interests of justice.
It will also be convenient to provide that notice of the interim order as well as of the
final orders will be given to the Superintendent of Police forthwith.” (emphasis
supplied)
27. Section 438CrPC reads thus:
“438. Discretion for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.—(1) Where any
person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having
committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of
Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be
released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the
following factors, namely—
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a court in respect of any cognizable
offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating
the applicant by having him so arrested, either reject the application forthwith or
issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has
not passed any interim order under this sub-section or has rejected the application
for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer in charge of a police station
to arrest, without warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended
in such application. (1-A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section
(1), it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less than seven days' notice, together
with a copy of such order to be served on the Public Prosecutor and the
Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable
opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court,
(1-B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the
time of final hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on
an application made to it by the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence
necessary in the interest of justice. (2) When the High Court or the Court of Session
makes a direction under subsection (1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular
case, as it may think fit, including—
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as
and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing
such facts to the court or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of Section 437, as if the bail were
granted under that section. (3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in
charge of a police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any
time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate
taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in the first instance
against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the court
under sub-section (1).
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of
having committed an offence under sub-section (3) of Section 376 or Section 376-AB or Section
376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).”
28. The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Bill for introducing Section 438 in
CrPC indicates that the legislature felt that it was imperative to evolve a device by which an alleged
accused is not compelled to face ignominy and disgrace at the instance of influential people who try
to implicate their rivals in false cases. The purpose behind incorporating Section 438 in CrPC was to
recognise the importance of personal liberty and freedom in a free and democratic country. A
careful reading of this section reveals that the legislature was keen to ensure respect for the personal
liberty of individuals by pressing in service the age-old principle that an individual is presumed to be
innocent till he is found guilty by the court. [See: Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of
Maharashtra [Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra, (2011) 1 SCC 694 : (2011) 1
SCC (Cri) 514] .]
29. In the context of anticipatory bail, this Court, in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre [Siddharam
Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra, (2011) 1 SCC 694: (2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 514], discussed the
relevance and importance of personal liberty as under: (SCC pp. 718-19 & 721, paras 36-37, 43 &
49-50) “36. All human beings are born with some unalienable rights like life, liberty and pursuit of
happiness. The importance of these natural rights can be found in the fact that these are
fundamental for their proper existence and no other right can be enjoyed without the presence of
right to life and liberty. Life bereft of liberty would be without honour and dignity and it would lose
all significance and meaning and the life itself would not be worth living. That is why “liberty” is
called the very quintessence of a civilised existence.
37. Origin of “liberty” can be traced in the ancient Greek civilisation. The Greeks distinguished
between the liberty of the group and the liberty of the individual. In 431 BC, an Athenian statesman
described that the concept of liberty was the outcome of two notions, firstly, protection of group
from attack and secondly, the ambition of the group to realise itself as fully as possible through the
self-realisation of the individual by way of human reason. Greeks assigned the duty of protecting
their liberties to the State. According to Aristotle, as the State was a means to fulfil certain
fundamental needs of human nature and was a means for development of individuals' personality in
association of fellow citizens so it was natural and necessary to man. Plato found his “republic” as
the best source for the achievement of the self- realisation of the people.
43. A distinguished former Attorney General for India, M.C. Setalvad in his treatise War and Civil
Liberties observed that the French Convention stipulates common happiness as the end of the
society, whereas Bentham postulates the greatest happiness of the greatest number as the end of
law. Article 19 of the Indian Constitution averts to freedom and it enumerates certain rights
regarding individual freedom. These rights are vital and most important freedoms which lie at the
very root of liberty. He further observed that the concept of civil liberty is essentially rooted in the
philosophy of individualism. According to this doctrine, the highest development of the individual
and the enrichment of his personality are the true function and end of the State. It is only when the
individual has reached the highest state of perfection and evolved what is best in him that society
and the State can reach their goal of perfection. In brief, according to this doctrine, the State exists
mainly, if not solely, for the purpose of affording the individual freedom and assistance for the
attainment of his growth and perfection. The State exists for the benefit of the individual.
49. An eminent English Judge, Lord Alfred Denning observed:
‘By personal freedom I mean freedom of every law abiding citizen to think what he
will, to say what he will, and to go where he will on his lawful occasion without
hindrance from any person…. It must be matched, of course, with social security by
which I mean the peace and good order of the community in which we live.’
50. An eminent former Judge of this Court, Justice H.R. Khanna in a speech as published in 2 IJIL,
Vol. 18 (1978), p. 133 observed that ‘liberty postulates the creation of a climate wherein there is no
suppression of the human spirits, wherein, there is no denial of the opportunity for the full growth
of human personality, wherein head is held high and there is no servility of the human mind or
enslavement of the human body.’ ”
30. In Kartar Singh [Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 899 : (1994)
2 SCR 375], a Constitution Bench of this Court held that there is no constitutional or fundamental
right to seek anticipatory bail. In the said case, this Court was called upon to consider the
constitutional validity of sub-section (7) of Section 20 of the Terrorists and Disruptive Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1987. The Constitution Bench also looked into the validity of Section 9 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1976 which deleted the operation of Section 438CrPC
in the State of Uttar Pradesh with effect from 28-11-1975. In the aforesaid context, Ratnavel
Pandian, J. speaking for himself and on behalf of four other Judges observed as under : (SCC pp.
698-700, paras 326-27 & 329) “326. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Bimal Kaur [Bimal
Kaur Khalsa v. Union of India, 1987 SCC OnLine P&H 918 : AIR 1988 P&H 95 :
PLR (1988) 93 P&H 189 : 1988 Cri LJ 869] has examined a similar challenge as to the
vires of Section 20(7) of TADA Act, and held thus : (SCC OnLine P&H para 108) ‘108.
In my opinion Section 20(7) is intra vires the provision of Article 14 of the
Constitution in that the persons charged with the commission of terrorist act fall in a
category which is distinct from the class of persons charged with commission of
offences under the Penal Code and the offences created by other statutes. The
persons indulging in terrorist act form a member of well organised secret movement.
The enforcing agencies find it difficult to lay their hands on them. Unless the police is
able to secure clue as to who are the persons behind this movement, how it is
organised, who are its active members and how they operate, it cannot hope to put an
end to this movement and restore public order. The police can secure this knowledge
only from the arrested terrorists after effective interrogation. If the real offenders
apprehending arrest are able to secure anticipatory bail then the police shall virtually
be denied the said opportunity.’
327. It is needless to emphasise that both Parliament as well as the State Legislatures
have got legislative competence to enact any law relating to the Code of Criminal
Procedure. No provision relating to anticipatory bail was in the old Code and it was
introduced for the first time in the present Code of 1973 on the suggestion made of
the Forty-first Report of the Law Commission and the Joint Committee Report. It
may be noted that this section is completely omitted in the State of Uttar Pradesh by
Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976
(U.P. Act 16 of 1976) w.e.f.
28-11-1975. In the State of West Bengal, proviso is inserted to Section 438(1) of the Code w.e.f.
24-12-1988 to the effect that no final order shall be made on an application filed by the accused
praying for anticipatory bail in relation to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, without giving the State not less than seven
days' notice to present its case. In the State of Orissa, by Section 2 of Orissa Act 11 of 1988 w.e.f.
28-6-1988, a proviso is added to Section 438 stating that no final order shall be made on an
application for anticipatory bail without giving the State notice to present its case for offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven
years.
329. Further, at the risk of repetition, we may add that Section 438 is a new provision incorporated
in the present Code creating a new right. If that new right is taken away, can it be said that the
removal of Section 438 is violative of Article 21. InGurbaksh Singh [Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State
of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465 : (1980) 3 SCR 383] , there is no specific
statement that the removal of Section 438 at any time will amount to violation of Article 21 of the
Constitution.” (emphasis supplied)
31. The aforesaid decision was discussed in the course of the hearing of this case for the limited
proposition that there is no constitutional or fundamental right to seek anticipatory bail. Section
438CrPC is just a statutory right.
32. In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia [Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980
SCC (Cri) 465 : (1980) 3 SCR 383] , a Constitution Bench of this Court (speaking through Justice
Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J., as his Lordship then was) undertook an extensive analysis of the provision
of anticipatory bail. This Constitution Bench decision can be termed as a profound and passionate
essay on how personal liberty under the Constitution can be consistent with needs of investigations
and why this Court should avoid any generalisation that would take away the discretion of the courts
dealing with a new set of facts in each case. Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. observed thus : (SCC pp. 575 &
579-81, paras 8, 12 & 14-15) “8. … Attendant upon such investigations, when the police are not free
agents within their sphere of duty, is a great amount of inconvenience, harassment and humiliation.
That can even take the form of the parading of a respectable person in handcuffs, apparently on way
to a court of justice. The foul deed is done when an adversary is exposed to social ridicule and
obloquy, no matter when and whether a conviction is secured or is at all possible. It is in order to
meet such situations, though not limited to these contingencies, that the power to grant anticipatory
bail was introduced into the 1973 Code. ***
12. … The legislature conferred a wide discretion on the High Court and the Court of Session to grant
anticipatory bail because it evidently felt, firstly, that it would be difficult to enumerate the
conditions under which anticipatory bail should or should not be granted and secondly, because the
intention was to allow the higher courts in the echelon a somewhat free hand in the grant of relief in
the nature of anticipatory bail. That is why, departing from the terms of Sections 437 and 439,
Section 438(1) uses the language that the High Court or the Court of Session “may, if it thinks fit”
direct that the applicant be released on bail. Sub-section (2) of Section 438 is a further and clearer
manifestation of the same legislative intent to confer a wide discretionary power to grant
anticipatory bail. It provides that the High Court or the Court of Session, while issuing a direction
for the grant of anticipatory bail, “may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the
facts of the particular case, as it may think fit”, including the conditions which are set out in clauses
(i) to (iv) of sub-section (2). … ***
14. Generalisations on matters which rest on discretion and the attempt to discover formulae of
universal application when facts are bound to differ from case to case frustrate the very purpose of
conferring discretion. No two cases are alike on facts and therefore, courts have to be allowed a little
free play in the joints if the conferment of discretionary power is to be meaningful. There is no risk
involved in entrusting a wide discretion to the Court of Session and the High Court in granting
anticipatory bail because, firstly, these are higher courts manned by experienced persons, secondly,
their orders are not final but are open to appellate or revisional scrutiny and above all because,
discretion has always to be exercised by courts judicially and not according to whim, caprice or
fancy. On the other hand, there is a risk in foreclosing categories of cases in which anticipatory bail
may be allowed because life throws up unforeseen possibilities and offers new challenges. Judicial
discretion has to be free enough to be able to take these possibilities in its stride and to meet these
challenges. …
15. … While laying down cast-iron rules in a matter like granting anticipatory bail, as the High Court
has done, it is apt to be overlooked that even Judges can have but an imperfect awareness of the
needs of new situations. Life is never static and every situation has to be assessed in the context of
emerging concerns as and when it arises.”
17. In light of the foregoing discussion and the precedents cited, certain clear principles emerge.
Applications concerning personal liberty cannot be kept pending for years while the applicants
remain under a cloud of uncertainty. The consistent line of authority of this Court makes it
abundantly clear that bail and anticipatory applications must be decided expeditiously on their own
merits, without relegating the parties to a state of indefinite pendency. Prolonged delay in disposal
not only frustrates the object of Code of Criminal Procedure, but also amounts to a denial of justice,
contrary to the constitutional ethos reflected in Articles 14 and 21.
18. We accordingly issue the following directions:
a) High Courts shall ensure that applications for bail and anticipatory bail pending
before them or before the subordinate courts under their jurisdiction are disposed of
expeditiously, preferably within a period of two months from the date of filing, except
in cases where delay is attributable to the parties themselves.
b) High Courts shall issue necessary administrative directions to subordinate courts
to prioritise matters involving personal liberty and to avoid indefinite adjournments.
c) Investigating agencies are expected to conclude investigations in longpending cases with promptitude so that neither the complainant nor the accused suffers prejudice
on account of undue delay.
d) Being the highest constitutional fora in the States, High Courts must devise suitable mechanisms
and procedures to avoid accumulation of pending bail / anticipatory bail applications and ensure
that the liberty of citizens is not left in abeyance. In particular, bail and anticipatory bail applications
shall not be kept pending for long durations without passing orders either way, as such pendency
directly impinges upon the fundamental right to liberty. 18.1. The Registrar (Judicial) of this Court
shall circulate a copy of this judgment to all High Courts for immediate compliance and prompt
administrative action.
19. In fine, both appeals fail, and the impugned judgment of the High Court rejecting the
anticipatory bail applications is affirmed. However, we clarify that the appellants shall be at liberty
to apply for regular bail before the competent court, and if such an application is made, it shall be
considered on its own merits, uninfluenced by any observations made by the High Court or by this
Court in these appeals.
20. With the aforesaid directions and observations, the Criminal Appeals are dismissed.
21. Connected Miscellaneous Application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………………………J. [J.B. PARDIWALA] …………………………J. [R. MAHADEVAN] NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 12, 2025