Bses Rajdhani Power Ltd vs Delhi Electricity Regulatory, ... on 6
August, 2025
Author: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench: Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 937
ORIGINAL/CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
WRIT PETITION (C) 104 OF 2014
BSES RAJDHANI POWER LTD. & ANR.
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.
WITH
WRIT PETITION (C) 105 OF 2014
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL No. 4010 OF 2014
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL No. 4013 OF 2014
WITH
WRIT PETITION (C) 1005 OF 2021
Table of Contents
1. Introduction. .......................................................................................... 4
2. Concept of a Regulatory Asset. ............................................................... 7
3. Facts...................................................................................................... 9
4. Submissions of Parties. ........................................................................ 11 KAPIL TANDON Date:
2025.08.06 Reason:
5. Impleadment of the State Commissions and Governments.................... 20 5 (i). Affidavits by State
Commissions. ...................................................... 21 5 (ii). Affidavits by State Governments.
...................................................... 25
6. Law Governing the Electricity Sector Prior to 2003. .............................. 26
7. Electricity Act, 2003. ............................................................................ 28
8. Provisions of the Electricity Act relating to determination of Tariff. ....... 31
9. Provisions of Act, Policies, Rules, Regulations, and Orders having a bearing on creation of a
Regulatory Asset. ............................................................. 35 9 (i). National Electricity Policy, 2005.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 5 9 ( i i ) . N a t i o n a l T a r i f f P o l i c y ,
2006.............................................................. 36 9 (iii). DERC Tariff Determination Regulations,
2007. ............................... 37 9 (iv). DERC Statutory Advice dated 15.12.2010.
...................................... 38 9 (v). Ministry of Power’s Letter to the APTEL. ...........................................
40 9 (vi). APTEL’s Order dated 11.11.2011. ................................................... 40 9 (vii). DERC Tariff
Determination Regulations, 2011. .............................. 41 9 (viii). DERC’s Tariff Order dated
26.08.2011 (FY 2011-12). .................... 42 9 (ix). DERC’s MYT Order dated 13.07.2012 (FY 2012-15).
....................... 43 9 (x). DERC’s Statutory Advice dated 01.02.2013. .................................... 43 9 (xi).
DERC’s Tariff Order dated 31.07.2013 (FY 2013-14). ...................... 44 9 (xii). APTEL’s Order dated
14.11.2013. .................................................. 45 9 (xiii). APTEL’s Order dated 11.03.2014.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 6 9 ( x i v ) . N a t i o n a l T a r i f f P o l i c y , 2 0 1 6 .
.......................................................... 47 9 (xv). DERC Tariff Determination Regulations, 2017.
.............................. 48 9 (xvi). Ministry of Power’s Affidavit dated 10.08.2022. ............................. 49
9 (xvii). Ministry of Power’s Affidavit dated 12.12.2022. ............................ 51 9 (xviii). Electricity
(Amendment) Rules, 2024 introducing Rule 23. .......... 52 9 (xix). DERC’s Order dated 19.07.2024
(true-up till FY 2020-21). ............ 53
10. Analysis. ............................................................................................ 53 10 (i). Electricity is a public
good and is regulated under the Act. ............. 54 10 (ii). Tariff determination is governed by the Act,
which entrusts this function to independent Regulatory Commissions. .................................... 54 10
(iii). Collaborative effort of the Regulatory Commissions to balance social justice obligations with
efficiency. ............................................................. 57 10 (iv). Tariff fixation takes into account
multiple variables and requires flexibility. Regulatory asset is a measure adopted during tariff
fixation that recognises right of recovery. ...................................................................... 58 10 (v).
Factors leading to an unmanageable regulatory asset, and consequent ‘regulatory failure’.
.................................................................................... 59 10 (vi). Law that governs creation,
c o n t i n u a t i o n a n d l i q u i d a t i o n o f r e g u l a t o r y a s s e t . .
....................................................................................................... 62 10 (vii). Accountability of the
Regulatory Commissions. ............................ 67 10 (viii). Powers of the APTEL.
.................................................................. 69
11. Conclusions. ....................................................................................... 77
12. Directions. ......................................................................................... 80
1. Introduction.
1. We are entertaining these writ petitions 1 and civil appeals2 only for examining a limited question
as to the law that governs the creation of a “regulatory asset” during the process of tariff
determination by the Electricity Regulatory Commissions, its impact on the rights and liabilities of
the stakeholders, the limits within which it can be operated, and finally the regulatory duties that it
invokes for the Regulatory Commissions. We also clarify that through these proceedings, we are not
determining the rights and liabilities of the parties, which will anyways be considered in the pending
civil appeals against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal of Electricity 3.
2. In these writ petitions and civil appeals, the three distribution companies that supply electricity to
consumers in the National Capital Territory of Delhi4, namely BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. 5, BSES
Yamuna Power Ltd. 6, and Tata Power Delhi Distribution Limited 7, have challenged the manner in
which the Delhi 1 W.P. (C) No. 104/2014, W.P. (C) No. 105/2014 and W.P. (C) No. 1005/2021 under
Article 32 of the Constitution.
2 C.A. No. 4010/2014 and C.A. No. 4013/2014 against the order dated 11.03.2014 passed by the
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity in I.A Nos. 364-365/2013 in Appeal Nos. 265- 266/2013.
3 Hereinafter “APTEL”.
4 Hereinafter “NCT of Delhi”.
5 Hereinafter “BRPL”.
6 Hereinafter “BYPL”.
7 Hereinafter “TPDDL”.
Electricity Regulatory Commission8 has determined the tariff for retail supply of electricity over the
years, leading to the creation and continuation of a “regulatory asset”. The prayers in W.P. (C) Nos.
104 and 105/2014 by BRPL and BYPL9 are similar, which we may formulate as follows:
i. To hold and declare that the petitioners are entitled to prudently incurred cost and
allowances in terms of Sections 61 and 62 of the Electricity Act, 200310 and Multi
Year Tariff Regulations;
ii. To direct the DERC to give effect to the deferred cost creating a regulatory asset in
accordance with Para 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy;
iii. To direct the respondent-generating companies to not disconnect or discontinue
power supply or take any other coercive steps till this Court determines an
appropriate mechanism for adjustment of dues owed by the distribution companies
from the amounts due and owed to them; and iv. To protect their investment and
assured return from the licensed business.
3. TPDDL has also filed W.P. (C) No. 1005/2021, where it has prayed for the
following reliefs:
8 Hereinafter “DERC”.
9 Hereinafter collectively referred to as “BSES Discoms”. 10 Hereinafter “the Electricity Act”.
i. To direct DERC to recognise its regulatory asset and formulate and implement a clear roadmap for
the liquidation of the regulatory asset in a time-bound manner of 3 years;
ii. In the alternative, to direct DERC to increase the Deficit Recovery Surcharge to 20% to amortise
the regulatory asset as per the National Tariff Policy;
iii. To direct DERC to implement various judgments of the APTEL in appeals against tariff orders by
the DERC.
4. In order to consider these prayers as well as the maintainability of the writ petitions, which has
been contested by the respondents, we will have to examine the concept of a ‘regulatory asset’ and
its creation and continuation in the context of the law that may govern it. Further, we will also
examine whether the law creates any statutory duties and whether failure to fulfil the same gives rise
to an enforceable legal right. For this purpose, we will commence with examining the Electricity Act,
and the rules, regulations, and policies framed thereunder as well as judicial precedents and
necessary practices for good governance of the electricity sector.
2. Concept of a Regulatory Asset.
5. A “regulatory asset” in the context of tariff determination for electricity utilities is an intangible
asset that is created by the Regulatory Commissions in recognition of an uncovered revenue gap or
revenue shortfall when a distribution licensee could not fully recover the costs reasonably incurred
by it through revenue from tariff. 11 This portion of the revenue requirement is not included while
determining the tariff for the particular year. Rather, the distribution company is entitled to receive
or recover such revenue in the future, over a period of time.
6. There are several situations and factors leading to the creation of such a regulatory asset. It is
generally created when the projected revenue based on the determined tariff is significantly lower
than the revenue required by the distribution company to recover reasonably-incurred costs as well
as for return on investment. When it is not feasible to recover this gap either by increasing tariffs or
through other means such as government subsidy during that year, a regulatory asset equivalent to
the uncovered expenses is created. Another situation requiring the 11 See Tamil Nadu Electricity
Consumers’ Association v. Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Appeal Nos. 192 and 206 of 2010, APTEL
order dated 28.07.2011. creation of a regulatory asset is at the time of truing up, if the actual
revenue realisation from tariffs is much lesser than the Annual Revenue Requirement 12.
7. This revenue gap can be recovered through government subsidies or by increasing the tariff.
However, the latter may lead to a tariff shock to consumers in a given year. Hence, to protect
consumer interests, the Regulatory Commission may choose to direct recovery of only some portion
of the gap while creating a regulatory asset for the remaining portion, which can be recovered in the
subsequent years. At the same time, the financial health and commercial viability of the distribution
company must be ensured by the Regulatory Commission. Hence, the Regulatory Commission must
ensure that if a regulatory asset is created, the same is recovered in a time-bound manner.
8. The creation and continuation of a regulatory asset is neither a statutory concept nor a power
granted under the Electricity Act. Rather, it is a measure adopted by the Regulatory Commissions,
which are statutory bodies, in exercise of their powers and functions under the Act. It is hence
guided by the legal regime of the Electricity Act and the rules, regulations, and policies framed 12
Hereinafter “ARR”.
thereunder, along with their interpretation in various judicial precedents.
3. Facts.
9. Initially, the Delhi Vidyut Board was responsible for generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity in NCT of Delhi. With the Delhi Electricity Reform Act, 2000 and the Delhi Electricity
Reform (Transfer Scheme) Rules, 2001, these functions were unbundled and different entities were
made responsible for each function. Until 2007, the Delhi Transco Limited 13 was solely responsible
for bulk procurement and bulk supply of power in Delhi, and all distribution companies were
required to purchase power from it. After 31.03.2007, the responsibility for power purchase in Delhi
was transferred to the distribution companies.
10. DERC adopted the Multi Year Tariff 14 framework in generation, transmission, and distribution
businesses so as to bring certainty regarding tariff and its annual basis during each control period.
13 Hereinafter “DTL”.
14 Hereinafter “MYT”.
11. A regulatory asset was first created by the DERC in the tariff order dated 09.06.2004 for North
Delhi Power Limited 15 and orders dated 11.06.2004 for BRPL and BYPL. In these orders, the DERC
introduced the regulatory asset as a mechanism to bridge the revenue gap in the tariff order for FY
2004-05, and it amounted to a total of Rs. 696 crores across BRPL, BYPL, NDPL and DTL.
12. Over the years, various orders of the DERC determining ARR for each year, MYT orders, and
truing-up orders demonstrate an increase in the quantum of the regulatory asset across all three
distribution companies before us. The DERC also provided for carrying costs on the regulatory asset
to each distribution company, which further contributed to its ballooning. We are informed that as
on 31.03.2024, the regulatory asset including carrying costs is Rs. 12,993.53 crores for BRPL, Rs.
8419.14 crores for BYPL, and Rs. 5,787.70 crores for TPDDL, totally amounting to Rs. 27,200.37
crores across all three distribution companies. During this time, the DERC has taken note of this
increase and introduced various measures like increasing tariffs, Deficit Recovery Surcharge 16, fuel
price adjustment charge and Power 15 Hereinafter “NDPL”, which is now TPDDL.
16 Hereinafter “DRS”.
Purchase Adjustment Charge 17. These measures are byproducts of the regulatory asset and are
intended for its liquidation.
13. After setting out the submissions of the parties as well as views of various State Commissions
and State Governments, we will examine framework within which the regulatory asset is created,
continued, and liquidated. We will refer to the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act, National
Tariff Policies, the Electricity Rules, DERC’s Tariff Determination Regulations, and introduction of
various measures by the DERC, either as mitigative or alleviative to deal with the problem.
Following this, we will determine the status of the regulatory asset and the consequential directions
that may be passed in these writ petitions and civil appeals.
4. Submissions of Parties.
14. We have heard Mr. Kapil Sibal and Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned senior counsels and Mr.
Amit Kapur, learned counsel for the three distribution companies, who are the petitioners and
appellants. On behalf of the respondents, we have heard Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, learned senior counsel
for the DERC, 17 Hereinafter “PPAC”.
Mr. R. Venkataramani, learned Attorney General of India for certain generating and transmission
companies, Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG for the Ministry of Power, Union of India, and Mr.
Siddharth Dave and Mr. Shadan Farasat, learned senior counsels for the Government of NCT of
Delhi.
15. Mr. Sibal made the following submissions:
i. Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Electricity Act, he
submitted that the statute intends to distance the government from tariff regulation
and determination by establishing independent regulators, and it aims to encourage
private sector participation in the electricity sector.
ii. Mr. Sibal then referred us to various provisions of the Electricity Act, including
factors guiding tariff determination under Section 61, tariff determination for retail
supply of electricity under Sections 62 and 64, and advance payment of government
subsidies under Section
65. He also took us through the mandatory and advisory functions of the State
Commission under Section 86, emphasising that the Commission must be guided by
the policies and plans formulated under the Act in discharge of its functions.
iii. He then referred us to the relevant portions of the statutory advice issued by the DERC to the
Government of NCT of Delhi by letters dated 15.12.2010 and 01.02.2013, which we will deal with in
more detail at a later stage. iv. Referring to Clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2006, he
submitted that a regulatory asset must be created only in exceptional circumstances that are clearly
defined in the regulations and that only include natural causes or force majeure conditions. Further,
that the regulatory asset must be recovered in a time-bound manner in 3 years, and preferably
within the control period. These conditions are also incorporated in Regulation 5.42 of the DERC
(Terms and Conditions for Determination of Wheeling Tariff and Retail Supply Tariff) Regulations,
2007 18 and Regulation 5.40 of the DERC (Terms and Conditions for Determination of Wheeling
Tariff and Retail Supply Tariff) Regulations, 201119, which we will deal with at a later stage. Mr.
Sibal submitted that these conditions for creation of a regulatory asset have not been complied with
by the DERC.
v. He then referred us to the Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2024 (notified on 10.01.2024) that
inserts Rule 23 in the Electricity Rules, 2005, which stipulates various conditions for creation,
continuation, and recovery of a revenue gap or regulatory asset.
vi. To conclude, Mr. Sibal submitted that the creation, continuation, and expansion of the regulatory
asset over the years can be attributed to the following causes: (i) assumed power purchase cost for
tariff determination is lower than the actual cost; (ii) assumption of inflated 18 Hereinafter “Tariff
Determination Regulations, 2007”. 19 Hereinafter “Tariff Determination Regulations, 2011”.
revenue; (iii) tariffs determined by the DERC are not costreflective; (iv) the orders of the APTEL and this Court regarding tariff fixation are not implemented;
(v) the state government has not paid the subsidy amount in advance as per Section 65; (vi)
payment of Late Payment Surcharge20 @ 18% on late payments to the generating companies; and
(vii) the truing-up exercise is not carried out properly.
16. Mr. Amit Kapur, for the BSES Discoms has submitted that currently, the regulatory asset is
about Rs. 26,000 crores (including the carrying cost payable to date). The continuation of the
revenue gap, without liquidating it in a time-bound manner undermines the very purpose of the
Electricity Act to promote private sector participation and to provide for cost-reflective tariffs. He
submits that there is a creeping acquisition of private distribution companies due to this.
17. Dr. Singhvi appearing for TPDDL then addressed us and made the following submissions:
i. To liquidate the regulatory asset, certain measures may be taken such as increasing
the DRS, increasing tariffs payable by consumers, and through government support.
Further, there must be a fixed timeline for liquidation as 20 Hereinafter “LPS”.
the quantum of the regulatory asset only increases with the passage of time due to accumulation of
carrying costs. ii. While the DERC’s roadmap for liquidation submitted before this Court estimated
recovery of the entire regulatory asset by 2022, this has not fructified. In this context, he submitted
that DRS of 8% is wholly inadequate as it is insufficient to even meet the carrying cost on the
regulatory asset.
18. Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the DERC then addressed us.
He took us through the scheme of the Electricity Act and its provisions, and also traced the history
of the creation and continuation of a regulatory asset by the DERC. While doing so, he made the
following submissions:
i. The DERC’s tariff order dated 11.06.2004 shows that the BSES Discoms themselves
suggested the creation of a regulatory asset to enable recovery of the revenue gap
over a period of time through gradual increase in tariffs. ii. Over the years, the DERC
introduced various measures to liquidate the regulatory asset, including tariff hikes,
8% DRS, carrying cost, fuel purchase adjustment charge, and PPAC. Currently,
TPDDL, BRPL, and BYPL levy 29.13%, 27.08%, and 31.60% PPAC respectively and
between FY 2018-19 to FY 2022-23, they have earned Rs. 3,230.48 crores, Rs.
4,399.48 crores, and Rs. 2,210 crores through PPAC. The DERC also increased the
tariff by 50% between FY 2011-15 as follows - 22% by order dated 26.08.2011), 23%
by order dated 13.07.2012, 5% by order dated 31.07.2013, and 8.32% by order dated
23.07.2014.
iii. However, these measures were not sufficient as between 2007 and 2012, the power purchase
cost, which constitutes 80% of the ARR, increased by more than 80% from Rs. 2.86 to Rs. 5.16 per
unit. The regulatory asset ballooned during this period due to this unprecedented increase in power
purchase costs, which is attributable to the increase in coal and gas prices. Further, the introduction
of CERC (Unscheduled Interchange charges and related matters) (Amendment) Regulations, 2010
prevented the use of UI mechanism for sale of surplus power at profitable rates.
iv. While the roadmap submitted by the DERC before this Court estimated that the regulatory asset
would be liquidated by 2022, this did not materialise for several reasons such as the distribution
companies not achieving the estimated 15% growth rate and carrying cost on the regulatory asset
being a compound interest that itself amounts to Rs. 8,692 crores across BRPL, BYPL, and TPDDL
from FY 2012-13 to FY 2019-20, while DRS @ 8% led to a collection Rs. 11,073 crores.
v. He submitted that the regulatory asset could not be liquidated as planned as the amount does not
remain static. With each tariff order, some portion is recovered while other factors lead to an
increase in the regulatory asset. Further, considering that the roadmap for liquidation was prepared
in 2014, it needs to be revised. vi. Mr. Nayyar also disputed the maintainability of these writ
petitions as there is a statutory mechanism under the Electricity Act for tariff determination, which
is a quasi- judicial exercise by an expert body and the scope of judicial review is limited. Further, the
Act also provides for appealing the DERC’s decision before the APTEL under Section 111. Finally,
there is no allegation regarding violation of any fundamental right for this Court to exercise writ
jurisdiction.
vii. Finally, Mr. Nayyar averred to tariff determination and regulatory assets created by other State
Commissions. He submitted that 15 states have implemented an automatic pass-through for fuel
costs, which means that the distribution companies in these states can pass on the rise in power
purchase costs to the consumers. He also submitted that other than Delhi, regulatory assets have
been created in Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Kerala, and Maharashtra.
19. We then heard the learned Attorney General for the generating and transmission companies
namely Indraprastha Power Generation Company Limited 21, Pragati Power Corporation
Limited22, and DTL. He submitted that while the DERC has 21 Hereinafter “IPGCL”.
22 Hereinafter “PPCL”.
recognised a revenue gap for all three distribution companies, BRPL and BYPL are not making
regular payments to IGPCL, PPCL and DTL, despite making regular payments to other power
utilities. He also submitted that TPDDL has been regularly paying the bill amounts. With regard to
n o n - p a y m e n t b y B R P L a n d B Y P L , h e s u b m i t t e d t h a t t h e s e d u e s c a n n o t b e
set-off/netted-off/squared off against the unrecovered tariff, which must be realised by the
distribution companies from consumers in accordance with DERC orders. He also submitted that
the adjustment of any payments against past dues is in accordance with the provisions of their
power purchase agreements and Rule 4 of the Electricity (Late Payment Surcharge) Rules, 2022.
20. We then heard Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG appearing for the Ministry of Power, Union of
India. He submitted that a regulatory asset is created when State Commission determines tariffs
while ignoring the principles laid down in Section 61 of the Electricity Act, specifically in
sub-sections (b), (c), and (d). In such situations, the approved tariff and revenue generated from it is
lower than the actual ARR of the distribution company. Further, the regulatory asset is created
without following the conditions specified in Clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2006 and
without a specific time period for liquidation. In order to recover this amount, he submits that the
tariffs may be increased, the state government may provide additional subsidies to reduce the
burden on the consumers due to increased tariffs, and through financial support by the state
government. He also submitted that liquidation must be in accordance with Rule 23 of the
Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2024.
21. Finally, Mr. Shadan Farasat and Mr. Siddharth Dave, learned senior counsels for the
Government of NCT of Delhi addressed us. They submitted that the regulatory asset is not
attributable to the subsidies granted by the Government and its payments under Section 65 of the
Electricity Act.
22. By order dated 23.10.2024, this Court directed the Government of NCT of Delhi to respond to
the subsisting regulatory asset. When the matters were listed on 20.11.2024, Mr. Shadan Farasat,
learned senior counsel appeared for the Government and expressed that the Government has not yet
taken its decision regarding subsidies and creation of the regulatory asset, the reasons for which we
directed be placed in an affidavit before us. An affidavit dated 06.01.2025 was filed by the
Government of NCT of Delhi indicating that the Department of Power had prepared a cabinet note
for circulation on 29.10.2024, which was circulated for comments. The same received concurrence
from the Law Department on 01.11.2024 but the comments of the Finance and Planning
Departments are awaited. It was also stated that the Government of NCT of Delhi is releasing the
subsidy amounts without default, and there is no relation between the grant of electricity subsidy
and accumulation of the revenue gap. The amounts payable to the BSES Discoms are directly
released to IPGCL, PPCL, and DTL for adjustment against outstanding dues, in accordance with
interim orders of this Court in these writ petitions and civil appeals.
5. Impleadment of the State Commissions and Governments.
23. After hearing the learned counsels for the parties, by this Court’s order dated 23.10.2024 we
directed the impleadment of State Governments and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions to
gather their views in light of the large-scale and nation-wide implications of creation and
continuation of regulatory assets on the electricity sector. Subsequently, by order dated 20.11.2024,
we directed the State Governments and State Commissions to express their views through affidavits.
Upon perusing these affidavits, the position of each state vis-à-vis regulatory assets can be captured
as follows:
5 (i). Affidavits by State Commissions.
24. Following is the gist of the affidavits filed by various Commissions.
i. The State Commissions of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh have submitted that they
have not created any regulatory asset at any point in time.
ii. The Maharashtra Electricity Regulation Commission submits that in compliance with Clause
8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2016 and Rule 23 of the Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2024, it
has not created a regulatory asset since March 2020 in respect of any distribution licensee in the
state. iii. The Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission for UT of Jammu and Kashmir and UT of
Ladakh also submits that it has not created any regulatory asset since FY 2019-2020 and tariff
determination is such that the ARR of the distribution companies is met from the revenue from
consumers and grant-in-aid from the UT Government.
iv. The Chhattisgarh State Electricity Regulatory Commission submits that there was a revenue gap
of Rs. 343 crores in FY 2011-12, even after tariff increase by 14%, but the same was fully apportioned
in FY 2012-13 with carrying cost. In FY 2012-13, there was a cumulative deficit of Rs. 1752 crores
that was partially apportioned by a 17% tariff increase and the remaining revenue gap of Rs. 828
crores was carried forward as a regulatory asset, which was subsequently apportioned in FY 2013-14
with carrying costs. There was no regulatory asset between FY 2013-14 and FY 2015-16. Then in FY
2016-17, the State Commission had to allow Rs. 1130.80 crores over and above the ARR to comply
with an APTEL order. To prevent a tariff shock, it allowed recovery of Rs. 370 crores in that year,
and created a regulatory asset for Rs. 760.80 crores that was recovered in FY 2017-18. There was no
regulatory asset created or carried forward between FY 2017-18 to FY 2019-20. In FY 2020-21,
considering the COVID-19 pandemic and to avoid increasing tariffs, the Commission created a
regulatory asset of Rs. 213 crores that was recovered in FY 2021-22. Post-COVID, the Commission
increased tariff by 6.19% and 2.31%, with no regulatory assets. However, as of FY 2023-24, there
was a cumulative revenue deficit of Rs. 2924.53 crores as the tariff hikes were insufficient to meet
expenditure. The Commission implemented various rationalisation measures to reduce the
regulatory asset to Rs. 2528 crores, which would be recovered with carrying cost during the true-up
for FY 2023-24 and tariff determination of FY 2025-26. It also submitted that no further regulatory
asset has been crated in the tariff order dated 01.06.2024 for ARR of FY 2024-25.
v. Kerala State Electricity Regulatory Commission has submitted that till FY 2022-23, the regulatory
asset is Rs. 7123 crores as per the Commission’s order dated 25.06.2022. Against this, the average
GPF balance estimated by the Kerala State Electricity Board at the end of FY 2026-27 is about Rs.
3500 crores, and the average surplus security deposit at the end of FY 2026-27 is Rs. 285 crores.
Considering these funds available with the Kerala State Electricity Board, the Commission decided
to amortise the balance gap of about Rs. 3350 crores during the control period while avoiding tariff
shock and financial burden to the consumers, in the following manner: Rs. 850 crores each year
from FY 2022-23 to FY 2024-25, Rs. 500 crores in FY 2025- 26, and Rs. 300 crores in FY 2026-27.
vi. The Rajasthan Electricity Regulatory Commission has submitted that as per its orders dated
31.03.2023 and 26.07.2024, the regulatory asset across the three distribution companies in the state
is Rs. 47,578 crores upto FY 2023-24 and Rs. 47,114 crores upto FY 2024-25. Various measures have
been taken for recovery of the accumulated regulatory assets including financial support from the
state government and introduction of monthly fuel surcharge to account for increasing power
purchase costs. The Commission also noted that decision regarding regulatory surcharge, tariff
increase, and adjustment of regulatory asset against revenue surplus will be taken in the successive
years. It has also submitted that under the Draft RERC (Terms and Conditions for Determination of
Tariff) Regulations, 2025, Regulation 91 provides for the creation of a regulatory asset only in
exceptional circumstances under natural calamity conditions. Even then, it shall not be more than
3% of the approved ARR and it shall be liquidated with carrying costs in maximum 3 equal yearly
instalments. Existing regulatory asset, along with the carrying costs, shall be liquidated in a
maximum of 7 equal yearly instalments. In case there is surplus in any financial year, it shall be
adjusted first against regulatory assets. This is exactly what is prescribed in Rule 23 of the Electricity
Rules made by the Central Government, which we will refer to in further detail at a later stage. vii.
The Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission submits that the regulatory asset in the State of
Tamil Nadu till FY 2021-22, including carrying cost, is estimated at Rs. 89,375.09 crores. The
Commission submits that this is more than 100% of the ARR, and hence a tariff-based liquidation
would not be feasible as it would excessively burden consumers. Rather, the same must be recovered
by upgrading transmission infrastructure, reducing aggregate technical and commercial (AT&C)
losses, and sourcing low- cost renewable energy sources. Essentially, the cost of procurement must
be lowered such that the revenue requirement of the distribution company is on par with the
consumers’ paying capacity. It further submits that in the true-up order for FY 2022-23, the
Commission directed the Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation to seek approval
from the Government of Tamil Nadu to liquidate the revenue gap till FY 2021-22 of Rs. 83,000
crores through government resources. Based on the Government’s decision, the Commission
submits that it will finalise the strategy for amortisation of the regulatory asset. It also submits that
it has endeavoured to not create any new regulatory asset from FY 2022-23 by proposing a tariff
increase in a socially balanced manner.
5 (ii). Affidavits by State Governments.
25. Following is the gist of the affidavits filed by various State Governments.
i. The State of Nagaland has filed an affidavit stating that it is a bulk power customer and is allotted
power by the Government of India from generating stations within and outside the state. The tariff
for the same is determined by the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission.
ii. The State of Odisha submitted that as per its communication with the Odisha Electricity
Regulatory Commission, the Commission has never created a regulatory asset. iii. The Government
of Madhya Pradesh also filed its affidavit through the Madhya Pradesh Power Management Co. Ltd.,
which has submitted that the State Commission has always followed a cost-reflective tariff and has
not created any regulatory asset.
26. We would have expected the State Governments to take a clear stand on the social justice
obligations of the State in the context of the power of the Regulatory Commissions to determine
tariff. The Regulatory Commissions are required to balance the interplay of the obligations of the
State to ensure access to electricity on the one hand, and the right of the utilities to recover
cost-based expenses on the other. We are aware of the autonomy that the Regulatory Commissions
exercise in the context of tariff determination, as well as of applicability of the National Tariff Policy
and Rules formulated by the Central Government on regulatory asset. We were conscious of this
aspect and the same is reflected in our consideration.
6. Law Governing the Electricity Sector Prior to 2003.
27. The supply and use of electricity was originally governed under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910,
which provided the legal framework for laying cables and other works. With independence and
industrialisation, the need for electricity in urban as well as rural areas increased, leading to
enactment of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 that mandated State Governments to constitute
separate State Electricity Boards that would be responsible for arranging supply of electricity in each
state and administering the grid system. It also provided for a Central Electricity Authority 23 for
planning and development of the national power system.24 23 Hereinafter “CEA”.
24 Tata Power Co. Ltd. v. Reliance Energy Ltd., (2009) 16 SCC 659, paras 67-71; BSES Rajdhani
Power Ltd. v. Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission, (2023) 4 SCC 788, paras 1113. These were the regulators, but the governments exercised substantial control on policy as well as
management of the sector.
28. Over time it was noticed that these State Electricity Boards were unable to respond to the rapidly
growing demand of electricity due to financial losses, low tariffs, lack of budgetary support from the
governments, or investments. 25 Further, various problems plagued the power sector, namely the
lack of rational retail tariffs, high level of cross-subsidies, poor planning and operation, inadequate
capacity, neglect of consumer interest, limited involvement of the private sector’s skills and
resources, and the absence of an independent regulatory authority. 26 This led to the enactment of
the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 with the objective of reforming the electricity
sector by establishing Central and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions, rationalising electricity
tariffs, transparent policies regarding subsidies, and promoting efficient and environmentally
benign policies.27 25 Statement of Objects and Reasons, Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act,
1998. 26 ibid.
27 The Preamble of this Act reads:
“An Act to provide for the establishment of a Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions, rationalization of
electricity tariff, transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of efficient and
environmentally benign policies and matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. “
29. In the NCT of Delhi, the Delhi Electricity Reforms Act, 2000 was enacted to
restructure the electricity industry by unbundling generation, transmission and
distribution, to increase avenues for private sector participation, and to take
measures conducive to the development and management of the electricity industry
in an efficient, commercial, economic, and competitive manner. 28
7. Electricity Act, 2003.
30. The Electricity Act, 2003 was enacted by the Parliament as a complete and
comprehensive law for regulating the generation, transmission, distribution, and use
of electricity in India. The Preamble of the Act reads:
“An Act to consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution,
trading and use of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive to
development of electricity industry, promoting competition therein, protecting
interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas, rationalization of
electricity tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of
efficient and environmentally benign policies, constitution of Central Electricity
Authority, Regulatory Commissions and establishment of Appellate Tribunal and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
28 BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd (supra), para 15. The Preamble of the Delhi Electricity Reform Act,
2000 reads:
“An Act to provide for the constitution of an Electricity Regulatory Commission,
restructuring of the electricity industry (rationalisation of generation, transmission,
distribution and supply of electricity), increasing avenues for participation of private
sector in the electricity industry and generally for taking measures conducive to the
development and management of the electricity industry in an efficient, commercial,
economic and competitive manner in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
31. Further, the purpose of the enactment is explained in detail in its Statement of
Objects and Reasons, the relevant portions of which are extracted hereinbelow:
“3. With the policy of encouraging private sector participation in generation,
transmission and distribution and the objective of distancing the regulatory
responsibilities from the Government to the Regulatory Commissions, the need for
harmonising and rationalising the provisions in the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998
in a new self-contained comprehensive legislation arose. Accordingly it became
necessary to enact a new legislation for regulating the electricity supply industry in
the country which would replace the existing laws, preserve its core features other
than those relating to the mandatory existence of the State Electricity Board and the
responsibilities of the State Government and the State Electricity Board with respect
to regulating licensees. There is also need to provide for newer concepts like power
trading and open access. There is also need to obviate the requirement of each State
Government to pass its own Reforms Act. The Bill has progressive features and
endeavours to strike the right balance given the current realities of the power sector
in India. It gives the State enough flexibility to develop their power sector in the
manner they consider appropriate. The Electricity Bill, 2001 has been finalised after
extensive discussions and consultations with the States and all other stake holders
and experts.”
32. Through reading the Statement of Objects and Reasons as well as the Preamble,
the salient features of the Act are:
i. The Act is a comprehensive code to regulate the generation, transmission,
distribution, trading and use of electricity and replaces the erstwhile 1910 Act, 1948
Act, and 1998 Act that governed electricity supply and use; 29
29 Tata Power Co Ltd (supra), para 76.
ii. The State Electricity Boards are unbundled into separate utilities for electricity generation,
transmission, and distribution, 30 and private sector participation is encouraged in these activities;
31 iii. The Act provides for development of the electricity sector through coordinated efforts of the
Central Government, State Governments, and various statutory authorities and regulators by
institutionalising electricity policies and plans; iv. While generation has been delicensed, the
transmission, distribution, and trading of electricity are licensed activities; 32 v. The Act provides
for a price discovery mechanism through tariff fixation;
vi. The Act entrusts the performance of regulatory and adjudicatory functions, including licensing
and tariff fixation, to permanent, independent Regulatory Commissions that act as expert and
specialised bodies. 33 It also enables dispute resolution through arbitration in specified cases; vii.
The Act established the APTEL as a specialised appellate forum; 34 viii. The Act provides for
offences as well as their penalties. 30 PTC India Ltd. v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,
(2010) 4 SCC 603, para 17. 31 Tata Power Co Ltd (supra), para 80; Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v. Rajasthan
Electricity Regulatory Commission, (2015) 12 SCC 611, para 29.
32 Tata Power Co. Ltd. (supra).
33 Tata Power Co Ltd (supra), para 78; PTC India Ltd (supra), para 17. 34 See West Bengal
Electricity Regulatory Commission v. CESC Ltd., (2002) 8 SCC 715, para
102.
8. Provisions of the Electricity Act relating to determination of Tariff.
33. Section 3 of the Electricity Act provides for the preparation, publication, review, and revision of
the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy by the Central Government in consultation with the
State Governments and the CEA for development of the power sector through optimal utilisation of
resources. Sub-section (4) also provides for the CEA to prepare a National Electricity Plan as per the
National Electricity Policy.
34. A distribution licensee is defined under Section 2(17) as a licensee operating and maintaining a
distribution system for supplying electricity to consumers in its area of supply. Electricity
distribution is a licensed activity as per Section 12, and the license is granted by the Regulatory
Commission under Section 14. Part VI of the Act deals with distribution of electricity – Sections 42
and 43 set out of the duties of a distribution licensee and open access, Sections 45 and 46 provide
for the power to recover charges and expenditure for supply of electricity, Section 47 provides for
the power to require security, and Sections 48 and 49 empower the distribution licensee to impose
restrictions and enter into agreements for supply of electricity.
35. The Electricity Act also lays down a regulatory mechanism as follows: Section 2(4) defines
“Appropriate Commission” as meaning the Central, State, or Joint Electricity Regulatory
Commission, as the case may be. The Central Commission is constituted under Section 76, its
functions are stipulated under Section 79, and its regulation-making powers are provided under
Section 178. Sections 80 and 81 deal with the Central Advisory Committee and its objects.
35.1 Similarly, the State Commissions are constituted under Section 82 and their functions are
provided in Section 86, which include both mandatory and advisory functions. The relevant
mandatory function for our purpose is under sub-section (1)(a), which provides for tariff
determination for retail supply of electricity within the State. Sub-section (4) provides that the State
Commission shall be guided by the National Electricity Policy, tariff policy, and National Electricity
Plan formulated under Section 3. The State Commission can also make regulations in exercise of its
powers under Section 181, including on the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under
Section 61 (sub-section (2)(zd)), methodologies and procedures for calculating expected revenue
from tariff and charges under Section 62(5) (sub-section (2)(zf)), the manner of making an
application and fee payable under Section 64 (sub-section (2)(zg)), and modifications or conditions
under Section 64(3) (sub-section (zh)). Sections 87 and 88 deal with State Advisory Committees and
their objects.
35.2 The Joint Regulatory Commission is constituted under Section 83, and its functions and
powers are under sub-sections (4) and (5).
35.3 Lastly, it is important to note that Section 142 empowers the Commissions to punish for
non-compliance of their directions, or any provision of the Act or rules or regulations made
thereunder.
36. The Central and State Governments are also given the power to make rules under the Act, under
Sections 176 and 180 respectively. Beyond rule-making, the Central and State Governments can
issue policy directions to the Central and State Commissions respectively in matters involving public
interest under Sections 107 and 108. These directions “shall guide” the Regulatory Commissions,
but shall not be binding on them. 35
37. In exercise of their powers and functions, the Central and State Commissions are required to
determine tariff as per Part VII of the Electricity Act. Section 61 lays down the guiding principles 35
Kerala State Electricity Board Ltd. v. Jhabua Power Ltd., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2819. for the
Commissions to specify the terms and conditions of tariff determination, of which the following are
relevant:
“Section 61. (Tariff regulations): The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, specify the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff,
and in doing so, shall be guided by the following, namely:-
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity are conducted
on commercial principles;
(c) the factors which would encourage competition, efficiency, economical use of the
resources, good performance and optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same time, recovery of the cost of
electricity in a reasonable manner;
(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
(f) multi year tariff principles;
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity and also,
reduces cross-subsidies in the manner specified by the Appropriate Commission;
(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy…”
38. While these principles have a bearing on making the regulations for tariff
determination, tariff is fixed under Section 62, inter alia, for retail supply of
electricity. Sub-section (5) also provides for compliance with procedures specified for
calculating expected revenues from tariff and charges that can be recovered.
Section 63 deals with tariff determination through bidding, and Section 64 provides the procedure
for application for tariff determination. Section 65 mandates that if the State Government requires
the grant of subsidy to any class of consumers in tariff, it shall pay the amount of such subsidy in
advance to compensate the person affected by the grant of subsidy.
9. Provisions of Act, Policies, Rules, Regulations, and Orders having a bearing on creation of a
Regulatory Asset. 9 (i). National Electricity Policy, 2005.
39. The Central Government notified the National Electricity Policy under Section 3 of the
Electricity Act on 12.02.2005, which laid down guidelines for development of the power sector,
providing electricity supply to all areas, and protecting consumer and other stakeholders’ interests
keeping in view availability of energy resources, technology, and energy security issues.
40. On 01.01.2006, the DERC issued a Public Awareness Bulletin setting out the major components
of ARR for Delhi’s distribution companies as well as the approximate ratio of each component in the
tariff. Power purchase costs are 80% of the tariff, operations and maintenance expenses are 9-10%
of the tariff, depreciation is 3-4%, return on capital employed is 6-7%, and income tax is 0.5-1%.
9 (ii). National Tariff Policy, 2006.
41. On 06.01.2006, the Central Government notified the National Tariff Policy, 2006 under Section
3 of the Act. Clause 8.2.2 of the Policy provides for the creation of a regulatory asset, as well as
certain restrictions on time-period and circumstances. It reads:
“8.2.2. The facility of a regulatory asset has been adopted by some Regulatory
Commissions in the past to limit tariff impact in a particular year. This should be
done only as exception, and subject to the following guidelines:
a. The circumstances should be clearly defined through regulations, and should only
include natural causes or force majeure conditions. Under business as usual
conditions, the opening balances of uncovered gap must be covered through
transition financing arrangement or capital restructuring;
b. Carrying cost of Regulatory Asset should be allowed to the utilities; c. Recovery of
Regulatory Asset should be time-bound and within a period not exceeding three years
at the most and preferably within control period;
d. The use of the facility of Regulatory Asset should not be repetitive. e. In cases
where regulatory asset is proposed to be adopted, it should be ensured that the return
on equity should not become unreasonably low in any year so that the capability of
the licensee to borrow is not adversely affected.” (emphasis supplied) 41.1 As stated
above, Section 86(4) provides that the State Commission shall be guided by the
National Tariff Policy in discharging its functions, and the Policy is also a guiding
principle for tariff determination as per Section 61(1)(i). This Court has held that
while the Policy does not bind the State Commission, it is a material consideration
that must guide tariff determination. 36 36 Tata Power Co. Ltd. v. Maharashtra
Electricity Regulatory Commission, (2023) 11 SCC 1, para 122.
41.2 Nothing can be clearer than the mandate under Clause 8.2.2 of the National
Tariff Policy, 2006. The real issue is to examine the circumstances and the
compelling reasons for the creation and undue extension of the regulatory asset over
a period of time, which we will undertake in our Analysis.
9 (iii). DERC Tariff Determination Regulations, 2007.
42. On 30.05.2007, the DERC framed the Tariff Determination Regulations, 2007 for the first
control period (FY 2007-2011), under which Regulation 5.42 deals with regulatory asset. It
stipulates that at the time of truing up, if variations on account of uncontrollable items like energy
sales and power purchase costs are large and it is not feasible to recover them in one year, the
Commission can create a regulatory asset as per Clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2006.
Regulation 5.42 in fact incorporates the National Tariff Policy and makes it a part of the enforceable
regime. The relevant portion is extracted below for ready reference:
“5.42 Variations on account of uncontrollable items like energy sales and power
purchase cost shall be trued up. Truing-up shall be carried out for each year based on
the actual/audited information and prudence check by the Commission;
Provided that if such variations are large, and it is not feasible to recover in one year
alone, the Commission may take a view to create a regulatory asset, as per the
guidelines provided in clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy.” (emphasis supplied)
9 (iv). DERC Statutory Advice dated 15.12.2010.
43. On 15.12.2010, the DERC issued a statutory advice to the Government of NCT of Delhi regarding
the financial position of BRPL and BYPL and whether they are able to meet expenses from tariff
revenue and return on equity. In this letter, the DERC stated that the tariffs for FY 2008-09 to FY
2010-11 are not cost-reflective and they do not account for the increase in power purchase costs
during this period, which constituted more than 80% of the tariff. While generating companies
recover the increase in cost from the distribution companies, the latter are unable to recover the
same from consumers under the present tariff. Distribution licensees resorted to extensive
borrowing to sustain operations, resulting in substantial interest costs and a precarious financial
position. The DERC noted that this is against consumer interests as these costs must ultimately be
recovered from consumers with carrying cost, and would burden future consumers with previously
incurred costs. The relevant portions of the DERC’s letter are extracted below:
“16. The Commission has analysed the ability of the distribution licensees to meet
their expenses and has considered the revenue from retail sale of electricity at the
tariffs determined by the Commission. These have been compared with various heads
of expenditure i.e. power purchase cost, operating expenses including interest and
depreciation, to determine the extent of surplus available towards the return on
equity allowed by the Commission.
18. Power purchase cost should not be exceeding 80% which was in the range of
73-80% in the year 2008-09, 7798% in the year 2009-10 and 113-135% in the first six months of 2010-11.
20. Power purchase and revenue recovered from sale of energy are not within the control of the
distribution licensees. Power purchase cost is mostly dependent upon the fuel cost which is market
driven. The generating company recovers the increase in the fuel cost and other variable expenses
every month from the distribution licensees, who in turn are not able to recover timely from the
consumers under the present dispensation. Thus, the operations of the distribution companies are
dependent on borrowings over a period of 18-24 months which entails substantial interest cost.
This, in any case, is detrimental to consumer Interest as all power purchase costs whether short
term or long term are passed through to the consumers (and recovered from the consumers along
with the carrying cost).
*** Conclusion The Commission is of the view that the tariff during previous years has not been cost
effective. The distribution licensees have had to resort to extensive borrowing to sustain their
operations.
*** (3) Accumulation of Revenue gaps beyond sustainable levels Analysis of the Audited Accounts of
the distribution licensees in Tables 1-3 would indicate that there is shortfall in the years 2009-10
and 2010-11 beyond sustainable levels. Thus, it would be quite obvious that in the absence of tariff
revision there is a growing revenue gap which is to be funded out of borrowings which are increasing
from year to year.
*** (5) Power purchase cost/quantum Analysis carried out for the years 2008-09 and 2009-10 in
Tables 1-4 would indicate that there has been a steep increase in the power purchase cost. These
issues would get addressed while taking the ground realities into consideration and estimating the
quantum and the cost based upon the current data based upon the latest bills available from the
generating companies, power purchase rates in the Power Exchange, Ul and bilateral contracts.” 9
(v). Ministry of Power’s Letter to the APTEL.
44. On 21.01.2011, the Minister of Power issued a letter to the APTEL to take suo motu cognisance
and issue necessary directions under Section 121 of the Electricity Act regarding periodical tariff
revisions for improving the long-term financial health and viability of the electricity sector.
9 (vi). APTEL’s Order dated 11.11.2011.
45. Pursuant to this letter, the APTEL passed an order dated 11.11.2011 37 wherein it issued various
directions to Regulatory Commissions regarding timely tariff determination, truing up, and
creation, continuation, and recovery of the regulatory asset. The directions issued by the APTEL are
as follows:
“65. In view of the analysis and discussion made above, we deem it fit to issue the
following directions to the State Commissions:
(i) Every State Commission has to ensure that Annual Performance Review, true-up
of past expenses and Annual Revenue Requirement and tariff determination is
conducted year to year basis as per the time schedule specified in the Regulations.
(ii) It should be the endeavour of every State Commission to ensure that the tariff for
the financial year is decided before 1st April of the tariff year. For example, the ARR
& tariff for the financial year 2011- 12 should be decided before 1st April, 2011. The
State Commission could consider making the tariff applicable only till the end of the
financial year so that the licensees remain vigilant to follow the time schedule for
filing of the application for determination of ARR/tariff.
(iii) In the event of delay in filing of the ARR, truingup and Annual Performance
Review, one month beyond the scheduled date of submission of the petition, the State
Commission must initiate suo-moto proceedings for tariff determination in
accordance with Section 64 of the Act read with clause 8.1 (7) of the Tariff Policy.
(iv) In determination of ARR/tariff, the revenue gaps ought not to be left and
Regulatory Asset should not be created as a matter of course except where it is
justifiable, in accordance with the Tariff Policy and the Regulations. The recovery of
the Regulatory Asset should be time bound and within a period not exceeding three
years at the most and preferably within Control Period. Carrying cost of the
Regulatory Asset should be allowed to the utilities in the ARR of the year in which the
Regulatory Assets are created to avoid problem of cash flow to the distribution
licensee.
(v) Truing up should be carried out regularly and preferably every year. For example,
truing up for the financial year 2009-10 should be carried out along with the ARR
and tariff determination for the financial year 2011-12.
(vi) Fuel and Power Purchase cost is a major expense of the distribution Company
which is uncontrollable. Every State Commission must have in place a mechanism for
Fuel and Power Purchase cost in terms of Section 62 (4) of the Act. The Fuel and
Power Purchase cost adjustment should preferably be on monthly basis on the lines
of the Central Commission’s Regulations for the generating companies but in no case
exceeding a quarter. Any State Commission which does not already have such
formula/mechanism in place must within 6 months of the date of this order must put
in place such formula/ mechanism.
66. We direct all the State Commissions to follow these directions scrupulously, and send the
periodical reports by 1st June of the relevant financial year about the compliance of these directions
to the Secretary, Forum of Regulators, who in turn will send the status report to this Tribunal and
also place it on its website.” 9 (vii). DERC Tariff Determination Regulations, 2011.
46. The DERC then issued the Tariff Determination Regulations, 2011 for the second control period
(FY 2012-2015, later extended till 31.03.2017), under which Regulation 5.40 is relevant and deals
with regulatory asset. Similar to Regulation 5.42 of the Tariff Determination Regulations, 2007, it
provides for creation of a regulatory asset when the variations at the truing up stage are large and
cannot be recovered in one year. Further, the regulatory asset must be created as per the guidelines
in Clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2006. The Regulation reads:
“5.40 Truing-up shall be carried out in accordance with Regulation 4.21, for each year
based on the actual/audited information and prudence check by the Commission;
Provided that if such variations are large, and it is not feasible to recover in one year
alone, the Commission may take a view to create a regulatory asset, as per the
guidelines provided in clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy.
Provided further that under business as usual conditions, the Commission, to ensure
tariff stability, may include the opening balances of uncovered gap / trued-up costs in
the subsequent Control Period’s ARR instead of including in the year succeeding the
relevant year of the control period after providing for transition financing
arrangement or capital restructuring.” 9 (viii). DERC’s Tariff Order dated 26.08.2011
(FY 2011-12).
47. The DERC also passed an order dated 26.08.2011 wherein it determined the ARR for FY 2011-12
and the true-up for FY 2008- 2010. In this order, it increased the tariff by 22% across the board for
all consumer categories and also introduced a fuel price adjustment charge.
9 (ix). DERC’s MYT Order dated 13.07.2012 (FY 2012-15).
48. In its subsequent MYT order dated 13.07.2012 determining ARR for FY 2012-2015 and true-up
for FY 2010-11, the DERC approved tariff increase of 23%, introduced the DRS @ 8%, and the
PPAC. The fuel price adjustment charge was absorbed into these. 9 (x). DERC’s Statutory Advice
dated 01.02.2013.
49. On 01.02.2013, the DERC issued another statutory advice to the Government of NCT of Delhi,
wherein it noted that the revenue gap was Rs. 19,505.04 crores, including carrying costs, across
BRPL, BYPL, and TPDDL since FY 2009-10. The DERC also specified various measures taken to
recover the revenue gap, including the 23% tariff hike w.e.f. 01.07.2012 and the DRS of 8%, but that
these were insufficient. In this light, the DERC recommended that the Government of NCT of Delhi
may take steps to ensure that benefits of Central Government sponsored schemes, direct subsidies
from state governments, and additional budgetary support are extended to the distribution
licensees. The relevant recommendations of the DERC to the Government of NCT are extracted
below:
“14. Recommendations:-
i) …The Commission recommends that Govt. of NCT of Delhi may take urgent steps
so that the benefits of various Central Government sponsored schemes are extended
to the Delhi distribution utilities and, in tum, to the electricity consumers in Delhi.
Unless this is done, tariffs in Delhi could become unsustainable, especially when
compared to other States in the country where State owned utilities not only avail the
benefits of the centrally sponsored schemes but also avail direct subsidies from the
State Governments as well as additional budgetary support for lower tariff levels.
ii) In case of APDRP, R-APDRP and JNNURM schemes of the Central Govt., the view
of the Govt. been that privately managed distribution entities should not be allowed
to avail the benefits of these programmes. The Commission is of the view that denial
of the benefits of these programmes to the distribution entities of Delhi does not
affect the managements of these distribution companies but, in fact, denies the
benefit of the schemes to the consumers of electricity of Delhi who are as a result
required to pay higher tariffs than are paid by the electricity consumers in other
States which avail of the benefits of these schemes. Thus, the Govt. of NCT of Delhi
may take up with the Ministry of Power that these schemes are availed of by the Delhi
distribution utilities for the benefit of the consumers in the NCT of Delhi.
iii) The financial bailout package introduced by the Central Govt. for financial
restructuring of State distribution entities with certain conditions including support
from the State Govt. is also being denied to the distribution entities in Delhi. Here
again, this view does not impact the private managements of these companies but has
a direct impact on their revenue requirements and consequently, the tariff required
to be paid by electricity consumers in the city. The Govt. of NCT of Delhi may take up
with the Ministry of Power to sanction the bail-out package for the DISCOMs of
Delhi.
This would be the single most important measure for deferring the incidence of high levels of past
revenue gaps on the tariff determination process.” 9 (xi). DERC’s Tariff Order dated 31.07.2013 (FY
2013-14).
50. In the next tariff order dated 31.07.2013 to determine ARR for FY 2013-14 and true-up for FY
2011-12, the DERC increased the tariff by 5% and continued the existing DRS @ 8% over and above
the revised tariff. It also allowed carrying cost on the regulatory asset to all distribution companies.
At this stage, the regulatory asset amounted to Rs. 8060 crores across the BSES Discoms and Rs.
3370 crores for TPDDL.
9 (xii). APTEL’s Order dated 14.11.2013.
51. The APTEL also passed the order dated 14.11.201338, wherein it reiterated its direction to the
DERC to provide for recovery of the regulatory asset in 3 years as per its order dated 11.11.2011 and
to implement the judgments of the APTEL. The DERC has filed civil appeals against this order,
which have been dismissed by this Court’s order dated 01.12.2021 as there was no substantial
question of law. 39 This Court also directed the DERC to implement the issues decided by the
APTEL, if not already complied, within a period of 3 months and to file a compliance report in 2
weeks thereafter. 40 The relevant portion of the APTEL order is as follows:
“37. As regards recovery of the Regulatory assets/amortization schedule and fuel and power
purchase adjustment mechanism, this Tribunal in OP No.1 of 2011 38 In O.P. Nos. 1 and 2/2012,
order dated 14.11.2013. 39 In C.A. No. 1854-1855/2014, order dated 01.12.2021. 40 ibid.
dated 11.2011 has given the following directions to the State Commission…
38. In view of the above, we direct the State Commission to take immediate steps for recovery of the
admitted revenue gap and decide amortization schedule and also ensure that the Fuel and Power
Purchase costs are passed on regularly and effectively as per the above directions of this Tribunal to
avert the problems of cash flow experienced by the Petitioners which may come in the way of
smooth operation of the distribution system and meeting the requirements of electricity of the
consumers in the national capital in a reliable manner if not remedied in time.
39. In view of the categorical stand taken by the Delhi Commission now, it is enough for us to direct
the Delhi Commission to implement the directions of this Tribunal given in the decisions referred to
above and pass an order in terms of those directions in future.” 9 (xiii). APTEL’s Order dated
11.03.2014.
52. The above-referred tariff order dated 31.07.2013 was appealed before the APTEL by BRPL in
Appeal No. 266/2013 and by BYPL in Appeal No. 265/2013 on the ground that the tariff order did
not provide a roadmap for recovery of the regulatory asset. In these appeals, BRPL and BYPL filed
IA 365/2013 and 364/2013 respectively for an order to increase the DRS to meet carrying costs upto
31.03.2014, to repay one-third of the principal component of the regulatory asset, and to provide a
plan for completely recovery of the regulatory asset in 3 years as per the National Tariff Policy,
2006.
53. The APTEL rejected the prayer for liquidating the regulatory asset in 3 years by order dated
11.03.2014, which has been appealed by BRPL and BYPL in the present civil appeals. However, the
APTEL directed the DERC to prepare a roadmap for liquidation of the regulatory asset, both
principal amount and carrying cost, keeping in mind the interests of consumers and the distribution
licensees.
54. In the present civil appeals (C.A. No. 4010 and 4013/2014) against the APTEL’s order dated
11.03.2014, as well as writ petitions by BRPL and BYPL, this Court by order dated 26.03.2014
directed the DERC to submit a roadmap for liquidation of the regulatory asset and also directed
BRPL and BYPL to pay the current dues to the generating and transmission companies. In
compliance with this order, the DERC submitted a liquidation schedule on 01.05.2014 before this
Court, in which it proposed to liquidate the regulatory asset including carrying cost in 6-7 years (by
FY 2020-21) by taking the average growth rate of distribution companies at 15%.
9 (xiv). National Tariff Policy, 2016.
55. On 28.01.2016, a revised National Tariff Policy, 2016 was notified by the Central Government,
wherein Clause 8.2.2 deals with regulatory asset. While the other conditions for creation of a
regulatory asset are similar to the National Tariff Policy, 2006, the time-period for recovery was
increased from 3 to 7 years. The relevant portion is extracted below:
“8.2.2 The facility of a regulatory asset has been adopted by some Regulatory
Commissions in the past to limit tariff impact in a particular year. This should be
done only as a very rare exception in case of natural calamity or force majeure
conditions and subject to the following:
a. Under business as usual conditions, no creation of Regulatory Assets shall be
allowed;
b. Recovery of outstanding Regulatory Assets along with carrying cost of Regulatory
Assets should be time bound and within a period not exceeding seven years. The
State Commission may specify the trajectory for the same.” (emphasis supplied) 9
(xv). DERC Tariff Determination Regulations, 2017.
56. The DERC then framed the DERC (Terms and Conditions for Determination of Tariff)
Regulations, 2017, which contains a separate section on regulatory asset. Regulation 154 provides
that an accumulated revenue gap approved by the Commission in the relevant tariff order shall be
treated as a regulatory asset, and that such revenue gap shall be computed on the basis of excess of
ARR over revenue approved after truing up for the relevant year. Regulation 155 provides for
carrying cost, and Regulation 156 deals with the how the regulatory asset must be shown in the
books of accounts. On a perusal of these regulations, it is clear that Clause 8.2.2 of the National
Tariff Policy, 2016 has not been referred, nor are there any conditions on when a regulatory asset
can be created, its quantum, and the time-period for its recovery. 9 (xvi). Ministry of Power’s
Affidavit dated 10.08.2022.
57. On 10.08.2022, the Ministry of Power, Union of India submitted an affidavit before this Court in
the present writ petitions. It submitted that while the DERC created the regulatory asset as an
exception, it is now being continued in a manner inconsistent with the Electricity Act and its larger
objective of a healthy and economical electricity sector. The affidavit also relied on the APTEL’s
judgment dated 11.11.201141 where it was held that the regulatory asset must be recovered in a
time-bound manner within 3 years, and preferably within the control period. The Ministry of Power
prayed that this Court direct DERC to devise a roadmap or plan for amortisation of the regulatory
asset in a time-bound manner as per the National Tariff Policies, to direct the State Commissions to
determine cost-reflective tariffs, and that no new regulatory asset be created except as per the
National Tariff Policy, 2016. The relevant portions of the affidavit are extracted below:
“10. That creation of Regulatory Asset essentially requires deferment of admitted cost
due to a Distribution Company to a future period in order to avoid tariff shock. This
concept was adopted by the Respondent No. 2 as an exception, however, gradually
the exercise of creation of Regulatory Asset seems to have become a trend and is now
being done on year to year basis. Such an approach is not only inconsistent with the
Act but is also irreconcilable with the larger objective to have a healthy and
economical electricity sector in the country.
11. That in order to address this situation, the Answering Respondent in compliance
with section 3 of the Act, notified the National Tariff Policy ("NTP, 2006") on
06.01.2006, wherein the Answering Respondent had directed that the 'Regulatory
Asset' should not be created under usual business condition and the recovery of
Regulatory Asset should be timebound, within a period of three years. Following are
the relevant extracts of the NTP, 2006…
12. That despite the above mandate, it was observed that the SERCs have failed/or
are reluctant to conduct the tariff determination exercise in consistency with the Act.
In this respect, on 21.01.2011, the Answering Respondent issued a Letter to the
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity ("Appellate Tribunal"), inter alia, requesting the
Appellate Tribunal to issue necessary directions to the SERCs to revise the tariff
periodically for improving the financial health and long-term viability of the
electricity sector, particularly for distribution utilities. Basis the letter issued by the
Answering Respondent, the Appellate Tribunal initiated a Suo- Moto proceeding
being O.P. No. 01 of 2011 wherein, various issues with respect to power of SERCs to
determine tariff were discussed…
14. That the Answering Respondent on 28.01.2016 issued the National Tariff Policy,
2016 ("NTP, 2016"). Clause 8.2.2 of NTP, 2016, provided that the SERCs cannot
continue to delay the liquidation of Regulatory Assets and the recovery of
outstanding Regulatory Assets along with the Carrying Cost should be done in a time
bound manner not exceeding 7 years…
15. That it is evident from the above that Answering Respondent has taken steps and
mandated that the SERCs (including the Respondent No.2) cannot create Regulatory
Asset as a matter of routine and the Regulatory Asset and directed the SERCs to
recover the outstanding Regulatory Assets in a time bound manner…
18. That in view of the above, it is submitted that the creation of a Regulatory Asset'
with no mechanism for recovery is contrary to the Act's legislative intent, as it
amounts to artificially keeping the tariff low while prejudicing the efficient recovery
of the tariff. Answering Respondent vide the statutory policies and various
communications have directed the Commissions to refrain from creating Regulatory
Asset and to amortise the Regulatory Asset within a time bound manner. However, as
evident in the present case, the Respondent No. 2 has not acted in the compliance of
the Act, Statutory policies issued by the Answering Respondent and the
Judgments/Order of the Appellate Tribunal and deferred the recovery of recognised
revenue gap for 17 years by creating the Regulatory Asset.
19. That it is therefore submitted that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to direct the
Respondent No. 2 to devise a roadmap/plan to amortise the Regulatory Asset in a
timebound manner as mandated under the Tariff Policies notified by the Answering Respondent or any
other methodology as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit in the present situation. Since such problem
is also observed in other State Commissions also, Hon'ble Court may also be pleased to direct all
State Commission for determination of cost reflective tariff and no new regulatory assets be created
as stipulated in the Tariff Policy 2016. State Commission may also be directed to devise a
roadmap/plan to amortise the Regulatory Asset in a time-bound manner as mandated under the
Tariff Policies notified by the Answering Respondent.” 9 (xvii). Ministry of Power’s Affidavit dated
12.12.2022.
58. In another affidavit dated 12.12.2022, the Ministry of Power submitted that the LPS fixed by the
State Commissions was 18%, which is “usurious” as bank lending rates are 6-7%. This higher LPS
means that distribution companies bear a heavy burden in case of delayed payments, which is
subsequently passed on to consumers. Hence, LPS must be linked to the Bank Lending Rate to make
it reasonable. Though this issue does not directly arise for our consideration, we are aware that it
has a bearing on the tariff, if not for the present but in future. Eventually, the burden is shifted on
the consumer. The Ministry also submits that taking into account these concerns, it has notified the
Electricity (LPS) Rules, 2022. The relevant portions of the affidavit are extracted below:
“In the absence of any Rules or directions with regard to the specific rates for Late
Payment Surcharge (LPS), the CERC and SERCS notified their respective Tariff
Regulations from time to time wherein different rates of the LPS were specified and
which were exorbitant- as high as 18 percent- whereas Banks are charging an interest
of only 6 to 7 percent on their loans. The extortionate rate of LPS lead to higher cost
of electricity for the common man; and a heavy burden on the distribution companies
putting them virtually into a debt trap.” 9 (xviii). Electricity (Amendment) Rules,
2024 introducing Rule 23.
59. On 10.01.2024, the Central Government notified the Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2024 by
which it inserted Rule 23, which deals with regulatory asset, in the Electricity Rules, 2005. This was
in exercise of its rule-making powers under Section 176 of the Electricity Act. Rule 23 prescribes as a
first principle that tariff shall be cost-reflective and that there shall not be any gap between the ARR
and the estimated revenue from approved tariff. The only exception to this rule is natural calamity
conditions. Four conditions are formulated for the creation, management, and liquidation of a
regulatory asset under Rule 23: First, the regulatory asset shall not be more than 3% of the ARR.
Second, the revenue gap shall be liquidated within 3 years. Third, the existing regulatory assets shall
be liquidated within 7 years. Fourth, the regulatory asset will have carrying cost as prescribed under
the Rules. We will deal with Rule 23 in more detail at a later stage.
9 (xix). DERC’s Order dated 19.07.2024 (true-up till FY 202021).
60. Finally, in its orders dated 19.07.2024 for truing-up till FY 2020-21, the DERC implemented
various decisions of the APTEL and this Court. Pursuant to this, the regulatory asset including
carrying costs is as follows: Rs. 12,993.53 crores for BRPL, Rs. 8419.14 crores for BYPL, and Rs.
5,787.70 crores for TPDDL. This amounts to Rs. 27,200.37 crores across all three distribution
companies until the end of FY 2020-21.
10. Analysis.
61. We are considering the legal position and status of a regulatory asset, the rights and liabilities of
stakeholders, consequences of regulatory failure to manage the regulatory asset as a reasonable
measure, and the appellate and review powers of the APTEL and this Court to ensure accountability
and restitution. 10 (i). Electricity is a public good and is regulated under the Act.
62. Since electricity is a material resource, the State has a public interest in ensuring that its
ownership and control is so distributed as best to subserve the common good. Therefore, the public
policy that governs purchase, sale and distribution of electricity is not based on market forces of
demand and supply but by regulation through statute. The Electricity Act 2003, the policies and
plan(s) formulated under Section 3 of the Act, rules made by the Central and State Governments,
and more importantly, the regulations formulated by the Regulatory Commissions, followed by the
precedents laid down by the APTEL and this Court form the legal regime, by which tariff is
determined, restructured, and reviewed from time to time.
10 (ii). Tariff determination is governed by the Act, which entrusts this function to independent
Regulatory Commissions.
63. The Electricity Act unbundled generation, distribution and transmission of electricity, and at the
same time, institutionalised important functions such as grant of licenses and determination of tariff
through the establishment of Regulatory Commissions. These Regulatory Commissions have
autonomy as provided in the statute, expertise through human resource, continuation through seal
and succession, plurality by composition, and accountability by transparency. With the powers that
they are granted, coupled with autonomy that they enjoy, these Commissions are the primary duty
bearers to implement the provisions of the Act. 63.1 Tariff determination is the exclusive province of
the Regulatory Commissions. In performance of their functions, the Central and State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions determine tariff for supply of electricity by generating companies to
distribution licensees, for transmission, wheeling, and also for retail sale of electricity. 42 Section 61
provides the guiding 42 Section 62 of the Electricity Act, which reads:
“Section 62. (Determination of tariff): ---
(1) The Appropriate Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with the
provisions of this Act for –
(a) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution licensee:
Provided that the Appropriate Commission may, in case of shortage of supply of
electricity, fix the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or purchase of
electricity in pursuance of an agreement, entered into between a generating company
and a licensee or between licensees, for a period not exceeding one year to ensure
reasonable prices of electricity;
(b) transmission of electricity;
(c) wheeling of electricity;
(d) retail sale of electricity:
Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area by two or more
distribution licensees, the Appropriate Commission may, for promoting competition
among distribution licensees, fix only maximum ceiling of tariff for retail sale of
electricity.” principles for good governance for development, sale, and distribution of
power and also emphasises the overarching principle of subserving the interests of
consumers. The journey as well as the destination of tariff determination indicates
that the Commissions shall adopt commercial principles, encourage competition,
promote efficiency, use resources economically, perform efficiently and optimise
investments. The purpose of adopting such measures is to “safeguard and protect the
interest of the consumers”. Section 61 also recognises the vulnerability of the
electricity sector to undue political posturing, and therefore emphasises that the
Commission shall ensure that “the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
electricity and also, Sections 79 sets out the functions of the Central Commission. The
relevant portion is as follows:
“Section 79. (Functions of Central Commission): --- (1) The Central Commission shall
discharge the following functions, namely:-
(a) to regulate the tariff of generating companies owned or controlled by the Central
Government;
(b) to regulate the tariff of generating companies other than those owned or
controlled by the Central Government specified in clause (a), if such generating
companies enter into or otherwise have a composite scheme for generation and sale
of electricity in more than one State;
(d) to determine tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity;…” Section 86 sets
out the functions of the State Commission. The relevant portion is as follows:
“Section 86. (Functions of State Commission): --- (1) The State Commission shall
discharge the following functions, namely:-
(a) determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the State:
(b) regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees
including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating
companies or licensees or from other sources through agreements for purchase of
power for distribution and supply within the State;…” reduce cross-subsidies”.43 In
this endeavour the National Electricity Policy and the National Tariff Policy shall also
be guiding factors. 44 10 (iii). Collaborative effort of the Regulatory Commissions to
balance social justice obligations with efficiency.
64. The Electricity Act contemplates multiple stakeholders, in other words, a plurality of
collaborators – the Central Government, the State Governments, Regulatory Commissions, the
Appellate Tribunal, statutory policy makers, and the utilities. These authorities collaborate to ensure
that the purpose of the Act is subserved and, in this endeavour, the Regulatory Commissions share
the social justice obligations of the State. Since electricity is a public good,45 Regulatory
Commissions must undertake joint and collaborative efforts with the other authorities to enable
access to electricity across urban and rural areas 46 and affordability through rationalisation of
tariffs 47. The statutory authorities must work in cohesion towards a common goal of ensuring
supply of electricity across regions and terrains, and cheaper and affordable 43 Section 61(1)(g) of
the Electricity Act.
44 Section 61(1)(i) of the Electricity Act.
45 See K.C. Ninan v. Kerala State Electricity Board, (2023) 14 SCC 431, para 93. 46 See Preamble of
the Electricity Act; Section 6 of the Electricity Act that places the responsibility of rural
electrification jointly on the Central and State Governments. 47 See Preamble of the Electricity Act.
supply of electricity to those sections of society who cannot afford it. 48 At the same time the
Regulatory Commissions maintain their independence and autonomy and ensure that the final
decision with respect to fixation of tariff will be that of the Regulatory Commissions alone.
10 (iv). Tariff fixation takes into account multiple variables and requires flexibility. Regulatory asset
is a measure adopted during tariff fixation that recognises right of recovery.
65. A regulatory asset is adopted as a measure by the Regulatory Commissions when the gap
between the revenue required by the distribution company to meet its costs and expenditure and the
actual revenue realised through immediate tariff is so high that it would not only prejudice the
consumer but lead to what is called a tariff shock. By adopting such a measure, the Commission
liquidates the revenue required by the utility through future tariff 48 Paul Craig, UK, EU and Global
Administrative Law: Foundations and Challenges (Cambridge University Press, 2015), 305-306. The
relevant portion is extracted hereinbelow:
“Regulation as an enterprise conceives regulators as governments in miniature, in
which efficiency and distributive goals are both legitimate regulatory concerns, and
anyway are inseparable'. The regulatory goals may include social cohesion, and this
function may be shared with government Regulatory independence is not regarded as
central, because regulation is conceived as a collaborative project between agencies
and other organs of government. Regulation in this mould is seen as delegation by
government of its inherent powers to act in the public interest. The emphasis is on
different actors working towards a common enterprise, with accountability conceived
primarily in terms of public law mechanisms such as proceduralization, judicial
review and parliamentary scrutiny. For Prosser this model has the virtue of rendering
it easier to understand in areas where regulation has a social rationale, and is not
driven by considerations of economic efficiency.” determinations. ‘Revenue assets’
are costs incurred by power distribution companies that are recognised as
recoverable from consumers in future tariffs but are not immediately recovered in the
current bills.
65.1 The measure adopted by the Commissions in creating a ‘regulatory asset’ can
also be seen as an accounting treatment.
Regulatory assets are treated as assets in the balance sheet and are liquidated over a defined period
of time through tariff adjustments or government subsidies. The regulatory asset is a cost incurred
by the utility that the Regulatory Commission allows to be deferred on the balance sheet instead of
being immediately expensed. It enables the distribution company to utilise the ‘recognition’ of a
regulatory asset to obtain bridge funds from bankers and the financial institutions as they have the
confirmation that the said amount will be recovered in the ensuing financial years.
10 (v). Factors leading to an unmanageable regulatory asset, and consequent ‘regulatory failure’.
66. While determining tariff, Regulatory Commissions have to deal with situations where there
could be a sudden increase in the fuel cost, infrastructure investments, or some extraordinary
expenditure. Further, lack of discipline followed by delays in filing the ARR leads to uncertainties.
Equally, not conducting quick and effective truing up multiplies the problem of ascertaining the
actual cost incurred. The failure to file ARR in time and the Regulatory Commissions not invoking
their suo motu powers to rectify the same are not addressed. There is a lack of accountability here.
Further, even though Section 65 provisions that State Governments shall pay in advance the subsidy
to subserve social justice obligations, it is alleged that such payments are not made in time. The
decisions taken by the Regulatory Commissions, which were considered in appeal by the APTEL and
this Court, give a clear impression that the Regulatory Commission is not able to take firm decisions.
Instead of taking strong decisions on the basis of the statutory mandate, we see instances where the
Regulatory Commissions manage and manoeuvre to arrive at a tariff by creating regulatory assets
over and above all permissible limits. This is where the problem lies. Though the Electricity Act
envisages functional autonomy for Regulatory Commissions 49 and the statutory scheme is
complete in all respects, the decisions taken by the Commissions, many a time, have not inspired
confidence of 49 See Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Ltd. v. Sai Renewable Power (P)
Ltd., (2011) 11 SCC 34, para 59; Kerala SEB Ltd. (supra), paras 16 and 17. independence and
autonomy. The reasons are not difficult to conceive as there is an issue about the appointment
process. The assertion of independence, however, comes through individual volition and that is
where the mandate of transparency leads to accountability. The decisions taken by the Commission,
rather the Regulatory Commissioners, are subject to scrutiny in the appellate and the review
jurisdiction of the APTEL and thereafter by the Supreme Court. We have dealt with this issue in
more detail while considering accountability of the Regulatory Commissions and powers of the
APTEL. All these factors give rise to a situation where the tariff for the subsequent years has to be
substantially increased to meet the ARR of the previous years. 66.1 A Regulatory Commission’s
power to create a regulatory asset is part of the tariff fixation process, as long as it is in reasonable
measure. However, in an egregious situation where the regulatory asset has grown beyond
proportion and is also extended from time- to-time inefficiently, there is a compelling need to deal
with it. In this context, the Regulatory Commissions have twin obligations:
first, the Commission must enable an efficient and effective recovery of the regulatory
asset by the utility, and second, more importantly, it must manage the regulatory
asset in a manner that does not transgress the principles that inform and govern
tariff determination. The regulatory asset cannot be permitted to balloon into such
proportions or continued for such periods, year after year, that the governance of the
sector is set in peril, affecting the rights of the utilities and at the same time
jeopardising the consumer interest, who eventually end up bearing the burden.
Creation, management and dissolution of regulatory assets are subject to law and
regulation. In performance of these duties, the orders of the Regulatory Commissions
are subject to the orders, instructions, and directions of the APTEL issued in exercise
of its statutory powers. When they fail to comply with these statutory and other
requirements, one can infer regulatory failure.
10 (vi). Law that governs creation, continuation and liquidation of regulatory asset.
67. In the context of creation, management and liquidation of a regulatory asset, the Regulatory
Commissions are bound by the mandate of the Electricity Act, the National Electricity Policy, the
National Tariff Policy, the Electricity Rules, the Tariff Determination Regulations applicable at the
relevant period, and the precedents of the APTEL. We have already indicated that the Central
Government recently notified the Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2024 by which it inserted Rule 23
that deals with regulatory asset. Prior to the notification, the Central Government elicited comments
from various statutory authorities, including the CEA, the Central and State Commissions, the State
Governments, generating and distribution utilities, etc. The reason for introduction of this rule is
evident from the circulation of the Draft Rules for stakeholder comments, wherein the Central
Government has expressed the need for a statutory rule on the conditions for creation and
management of a regulatory asset as follows:
“3. In order to remove difficulties/challenges faced by various entities and to
facilitate development of the power sector some more reforms are proposed. The
issues and the reforms proposed to resolve them are mentioned below:
iii) To ensure financial sustainability of the power sector, it is necessary that the tariff
is cost reflective and all the prudent cost is pass through. However, it has been
observed that in many States there is large gap in approved ARR and estimated
revenue on approved tariff. To discourage such practice there is need to make
statutory provisions to avoid such gap. It is also imperative that liquidation of any
such gaps in revenue required and estimated approved tariff is done in a time bound
manner. New rules are proposed to ensure that revenue gap/regulatory assets is not
created except in extraordinary circumstances and to provide for time bound
liquidation of the same.” 67.1 In furtherance of this object and purpose, Rule 23
provides as follows:
“Rule 23. Gap between approved Annual Revenue Requirement and estimated
annual revenue from approved tariff.– The tariff shall be cost reflective and there
shall not be any gap between approved Annual Revenue Requirement and estimated
annual revenue from approved tariff except under natural calamity conditions:
Provided that such gap, created if any, shall not be more than three percent of the
approved Annual Revenue Requirement: Provided further that such gap along with
the carrying costs at the base rate of Late Payment Surcharge as specified in the
Electricity (Late Payment Surcharge and Related Matters) Rules, 2022, as amended
from time to time shall be liquidated in maximum three numbers of equal yearly
installments from the next financial year: Provided also that any gap between
approved Annual Revenue Requirement and estimated annual revenue from
approved tariff existing on the date of notification of these rules, along with the
carrying costs at the base rate of Late Payment Surcharge as specified in the
Electricity (Late Payment Surcharge and Related Matters) Rules, 2022, as amended
from time to time shall be liquidated in maximum seven numbers of equal yearly
installments starting from the next financial year.” 67.2 The rule has come into
existence after detailed consultation with all the stakeholders. It subserves a salutary
purpose and sets a normative principle in motion. Rule 23 is issued in exercise of
powers under Section 176, which enables the Central Government to make rules to
carry out the provisions of the Act. 50 Sub-section (2)(z) of the Section 176 provides
that without prejudice to the generality of the rule-making power, the Central
Government may also provide for, by way of a rule, “any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, prescribed”. The expression “prescribed” is defined in
Section 2(52) to mean “prescribed by rules made by the Appropriate Government
under this Act”. It may sound 50 The relevant portion of Section 176 of the Electricity
Act reads:
“Section 176. (Power of Central Government to make rules): ---
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: - *** (z) any other
matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.” tautological, but the correct
way to examine the legal position is to look at the provisions with respect to which
the Central Government or the State Governments may make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. The province or domain with respect to which rules can be
made is based on the functions that have been assigned to the Government(s) and the
Regulatory Commissions. Tariff determination is provisioned in Sections 61 and 62 of
the Act, and this must be read with the functions of the Regulatory Commissions
under Sections 79 and 86 and the power of the Central and State Commissions to
make regulations under Sections 178 and 181.
67.3 The creation of a regulatory asset, being a measure undertaken by the Regulatory Commissions
as part of tariff determination, such exercise is informed by Section 61 read with Sections 79 and 86.
It is also important to note that Rules made by the Central Government under Section 176 are
binding on the Regulatory Commissions when they make regulations because Sections 178 and 181
provide that the “Commission may make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules”. In any
event of the matter, the principle that one must adopt is that the adverse effect of an overbearing
regulatory asset extended beyond proportion is an anathema to good governance of the Electricity
Act. It affects every stakeholder, the worst of all being the consumer who is burdened, rather
over-burdened, from time to time because of the lapses of the regulators or the manipulation of the
utilities or the indifference of the government. Therefore, the principle formulated in Rule 23,
consistent with Clause 8.2.2 of the National Tariff Policy, 2016 and the scheme of the Act, must be
the normative principle which must invariably be followed. Wherever Rule 23 is incorporated into
the Tariff Determination Regulations of the State Commission, it shall be complied with. 67.4 We
have dealt with the legal regime in detail and have also extracted the relevant provisions, rules,
regulations, policies, instructions and precedents. A combined effect of these can be restated as
follows: (i) As a first principle, tariff shall be cost- reflective; (ii) The revenue gap between the
approved ARR and the estimated annual revenue from approved tariff must be only in exceptional
circumstances; (iii) The regulatory asset should not exceed a reasonable percentage, which can be
arrived on the basis of Rule 23 of the Electricity Rules that prescribes 3% of the ARR as the guiding
principle; (iv) If a regulatory asset is created, it must be liquidated within a period of 3 years from
01.04.2024, taking Rule 23 as the guiding principle; (v) The existing regulatory asset must be
liquidated in a maximum of 7 years starting from 01.04.2024, taking Rule 23 as the guiding
principle; and (vi) Regulatory Commissions must provide the trajectory and roadmap for liquidation
of the regulatory asset, which will include a provision for dealing with carrying costs. Regulatory
Commissions must also undertake strict and intensive audit of the circumstances in which the
distribution companies have continued without recovery of the regulatory asset. 10 (vii).
Accountability of the Regulatory Commissions.
68. A Regulatory Commission must perform its functions as per the provisions of the Electricity Act,
the National Electricity Policy, the National Tariff Policy, the relevant rules and regulations made
under the Act, and the APTEL’s directions51. In performance of its functions, the Regulatory
Commission’s decisions are subject to appeal before the APTEL as well as the Supreme Court. 52
The APTEL has also issued directions under Section 121 from time to time for timely determination
of tariff, regular truing up, and 51 Section 121 of the Electricity Act.
52 Sections 111 and 125 of the Electricity Act.
management of a regulatory asset, as indicated hereinabove53. The Regulatory Commissions must
abide by and implement the directions of the APTEL. That is how accountability can be ensured.
The need for accountability and its dimensions have been explained by this Court in Vijay Rajmohan
v. CBI54 as follows:
“34. Accountability in itself is an essential principle of administrative law. Judicial
review of administrative action will be effective and meaningful by ensuring
accountability of the officer or authority in charge.
35. The principle of accountability is considered as a cornerstone of the human rights
framework. It is a crucial feature that must govern the relationship between “duty
bearers” in authority and “right holders” affected by their actions. Accountability of
institutions is also one of the development goals adopted by the United Nations in
2015 and is also recognised as one of the six principles of the Citizens Charter
Movement.
36. Accountability has three essential constituent dimensions: (i) responsibility, (ii)
answerability, and
(iii) enforceability. Responsibility requires the identification of duties and
performance obligations of individuals in authority and with authorities.
Answerability requires reasoned decision-making so that those affected by their
decisions, including the public, are aware of the same. Enforceability requires
appropriate corrective and remedial action against lack of responsibility and
accountability to be taken. Accountability has a corrective function, making it
possible to address individual or collective grievances. It enables action against
officials or institutions for dereliction of duty. It also has a preventive function that
helps to identify the procedure or policy which has become non-functional and to
improve upon it.”
53 In O.P No. 1/2011 (supra) and O.P. Nos. 1 and 2/2012 (supra). 54 (2023) 1 SCC 329.
10 (viii). Powers of the APTEL.
69. Under Section 110 of the Act, the Central Government establishes the Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity to hear appeals against orders of the Adjudicating Officer or the Appropriate
Commission. Section 111 is the statutory remedy for any person aggrieved against an order made by
the Adjudicating Officer or that of the Appropriate Commission as it provides for the appellate
power of the Tribunal, which reads as follows:
“Section 111. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal: --- (1) Any person aggrieved by an order
made by an adjudicating officer under this Act (except under section 127) or an order
made by the Appropriate Commission under this Act may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity…” 69.1 While exercising appellate jurisdiction, the
APTEL routinely interprets the Act and the rules and regulations framed thereunder,
by which process it systematically evolves legal principles. These very principles are
applied consistently for a structural evolution of sectoral laws. This freedom to evolve
and interpret laws must belong to the APTEL to subserve the regulatory regime for
clarity and consistency. In a similar context, while interpreting the scope of appellate
jurisdiction of the Securities Appellate Tribunal against orders of the regulator, the
SEBI, this Court in SEBI v. Mega Corporation 55 held as under;
“20. … Being a permanent body, apart from acting as an appellate Tribunal on fact, the Tribunal
routinely interprets the Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder and evolves a legal regime,
systematically developed over a period of time. The advantage and benefit of this process is
consistency and structural evolution of the sectorial laws.
21. … This freedom to evolve and interpret laws must belong to the Tribunals to subserve the
regulatory regime for clarity and consistency and it is with this perspective that the Supreme Court
will consider appeals against judgment of the Tribunals on questions of law arising from its orders.
*** 23.2 … The Tribunal while exercising jurisdiction under Section 15-T, apart from acting as an
appellate authority on fact, also interprets the Act, Rules and Regulations made thereunder and
systematically evolves a legal regime. These very principles are applied consistently for structural
evolution of the sectorial laws….” 69.2 The power under Section 111 is that of an appeal and as such
the decision of the APTEL shall be after re-appreciation of facts and by applying the law on the
subject. The APTEL will also examine the legality, propriety or correctness of the orders made by the
Regulatory Commissions, and it may also on its own motion make such orders as are appropriate for
adjudication and determination of the case.
69.3 Apart from Section 111 under which the APTEL is granted appellate jurisdiction, it is significant
to note that the Parliament has also empowered the APTEL with important jurisdiction and 55
(2023) 12 SCC 802.
powers under Section 121, which is reproduced hereinunder for ready reference.
“Section 121. (Power of Appellate Tribunal): --- The Appellate Tribunal may, after hearing the
Appropriate Commission or other interested party, if any, from time to time, issue such orders,
instructions or directions as it may deem fit, to any Appropriate Commission for the performance of
its statutory functions under this Act.” 69.4 We can explain the significance of Section 121 in the
context of the facts of these very writ petitions and civil appeals. The facts relating to the
performance of DERC present a classic case of ‘regulatory failure’. Typically, ‘regulatory failure’ does
not come under scrutiny when the APTEL considers appeals from orders of the Regulatory
Commissions as the focus at that time is on the merits of the decision made by the Commission. The
institutional failures or the shortcomings of the regulatory bodies are often ignored and an appellate
forum or even constitutional courts proceed to resolve the issue by addressing the merits of the case.
In Lifecare Innovations Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India 56 this Court had an occasion to reflect on this
problem and held as follows;
“21. Having considered the provisions of the Act and the MSE Procurement Preference Policy, 2012,
we are of the opinion that there is no mandatory minimum procurement ‘right’ of an individual
MSE. However, there is certainly a statutory foundation for the Procurement Preference Policy,
2012, having force of law as it ‘encapsulates a mandate 56 2025 INSC 269.
and discloses a specific purpose’. 57 Clause 3 of the policy mandating procurement of 25 per cent of
supply from MSEs is simply the statutory duty of the bodies constituted under the Act and the
Policy. The significance of creation and establishment of these statutory and administrative bodies is
not difficult to conceive. If these institutions and bodies work effectively and efficiently, it is but
natural that the purpose and object of the legislation will be achieved in a substantial measure. It is,
therefore, necessary to ensure that in the functioning of these bodies, there is efficiency in
administration, expertise through composition, integrity through human resources, transparency
and accountability, and response-ability through regular review, audits and assessments.
22. While exercising judicial review of administrative action in the context of Statutes, laws, rules or
policies establishing statutory or administrative bodies to implement the provisions of the Act or its
policy, the first duty of constitutional courts is to ensure that these bodies are in a position to
effectively and efficiently perform their obligations. This approach towards judicial review has
multiple advantages. In the first place, while continually operating in the field with domain experts,
these bodies acquire domain expertise, the consequence of which would also be informed
decision-making and consistency. Further, the critical mass of institutional memory acquired by
these bodies will have a direct bearing on the systematic development of the sector and this will also
help handling polycentric issues. Thirdly, while continuously being on the field, and having acquired
the capability of making real-time assessments about the working of the policies, these bodies will
be in a position to visualize course correction for future policymaking.” 69.5 In the above referred
matter, this Court was considering the duty to ensure institutional integrity and efficiency of the 57
Gulf Goans Hotels Co. Ltd v. Union of India, (2014) 10 SCC 673 “…a government policy may acquire
the ‘force of ‘law’ if it conforms to a certain form possessed by other laws in force and encapsulates a
mandate and discloses a specific purpose”; Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India (1972) 2 SCC
788 “What is termed ‘policy’ can become justiciable when it exhibits itself in the shape of even
purported ‘law’. According to Article 13(3)(a) of the Constitution, ‘law’ includes ‘any Ordinance,
order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the
force of law’. So long as policy remains in the realm of even rules framed for the guidance of
executive and administrative authorities it may bind those authorities as declarations of what they
are expected to do under it.” regulators under the MSME Act. A similar approach was adopted by
this Court in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad58 for reviving and effectuating the environment
regulators, rather than taking over or routinely reviewing their decision making.
69.6 ‘Regulatory failure’ occurs due to ineffective functioning of the Regulatory Commissions,
excessive governmental interference, or ‘regulatory capture’. We cannot wish away these real and
imminent dangers that affect effective functioning of the Regulatory Commissions. These issues
could have the effect of completely eclipsing regulatory functions, thereby losing the very purpose
and object of restructuring the electricity sector by unbundling the functions of generation,
distribution, and transmission and more importantly, establishing independent regulatory
institutions and granting them the exclusive jurisdiction over grant of licenses and tariff
determination. Section 121 is intended to ensure that in the functioning of the Regulatory
Commissions, there is efficiency in administration, expertise through human resource, integrity
through transparency, and accountability and responsibility through review audit and assessment.
For enforcing these values, Section 121 empowers the 58 In Re: T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v.
Union of India, 2024 INSC 78, paras 27-30. APTEL to issue such orders, instructions or directions
as it deems fit, to the Commission for performance of its statutory functions under the Act.
69.7 The power of the APTEL to issue such orders and directions takes within its sweep the power to
enforce such orders, as provided in Section 120(3) of the Act. 59 The power under Section 121 is
extremely important as it is intended by the Parliament that the APTEL must be the guiding force to
ensure that Regulatory Commissions across the length and breadth of the nation perform their
statutory functions with efficiency and integrity. 69.8 This position is already recognized by the
APTEL, as is evident from its order in O.P. No. 1 of 2011, relevant portion of which has already been
reproduced in this judgment. It is necessary to restate the directions issued by the Appellate
Tribunal in its orders dated 11.11.2011 and 14.11.2013, as it is relevant for the present purpose:
i. The APTEL has the power and the duty to issue directions to Regulatory
Commissions when they fail to comply with the Act, rules or regulations, fail to
perform their 59 Section 120(3) of the Electricity Act reads:
“Section 120. (Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal): --- *** (3) An order
made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate
Tribunal as a decree of civil court and, for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall
have all the powers of a civil court.” statutory functions and duties, or perform the
same negligently, improperly or poorly. 60 Such directions are intended to secure
compliance with the letter and spirit of the Electricity Act, and the APTEL can
monitor the same through periodical status reports and by setting timelines for the
Regulatory Commissions. 61 ii. Tariff determination is a statutory function entrusted
to the Regulatory Commissions, and it must be undertaken on a regular, timely, and
annual basis. 62 iii. Regulatory Commissions must undertake truing up on a regular
basis, immediately at the end of the financial year so that any discrepancies between
the ARR and the revenue realised through tariffs is brought to notice and can be
rectified in a timely manner. 63 This is necessary so that the burden or benefit of
present years is not carried forward to future consumers, and delay in truing up could
lead to imposition of carrying costs and cash-flow problems for the utility. 64 iv. The
tariff determined by the Regulatory Commissions must be cost-reflective as per
Section 61 of the Electricity Act. 65 v. Regulatory Commissions must not ordinarily
leave revenue gaps or create regulatory assets, and when it does so in exceptional
circumstances, it must comply 60 O.P. No. 1/2011 (supra), para 47-48; O.P. Nos. 1
and 2/2012 (supra), para 15.
62 O.P. No. 1/2011 (supra), paras 59, 65(i) and (ii); O.P Nos. 1 and 2/2012 (supra), para 15. 63 O.P.
No. 1/2011 (supra), para 65(i) and (iii). 64 ibid, para 57.
65 ibid, para 65(iv).
with the provisions of the Act, rules and regulations on the issue;66 vi. In case a Regulatory
Commission creates a regulatory asset, it must allow carrying costs to the distribution utility,
time-bound recovery and a liquidation schedule, and ensure that neither the financial position and
liquidity of the distribution company nor consumer interests are jeopardised. 67 69.9 We reiterate
that the Regulatory Commissions must call for ARR, ensure that tariffs are determined, and that
truing up is conducted in a timely manner, by exercising suo motu powers if necessary. In case of
non-compliance with these directions, the APTEL has the power and duty to call for an explanation,
ensure accountability, and monitor compliance by the Regulatory Commissions. Similarly, the
APTEL must exercise its powers under Section 121 to ensure that the legal principles on regulatory
asset laid down by us in paragraph 67.3 hereinabove are complied with by the Regulatory
Commissions, and it must monitor the same. In case of non-compliance, the APTEL must issue such
orders, directions, or instructions to the Commissions as may be necessary to hold them
accountable.
66 ibid, paras 62, 65(iv).
67 ibid, para 62(iv); O.P. Nos. 1 and 2/2012, para 38.
11. Conclusions.
70. In the following ten sutras, we have examined the issue relating to regulatory asset, its position
in the regulatory regime for determination of tariff, the duties and accountability of the regulators -
the Regulatory Commissions and then powers of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity to avert a
regulatory failure. I. Electricity is a public good. Its generation, transmission, and distribution are
statutorily regulated to ensure access to supply, on a non-rival and non-exclusive basis.
II. Being a material resource within Article 39 of the Constitution of India, Part-IV of the
Constitution must inform the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity. III. The
statutory regulators, i.e. the Central and State Regulatory Commissions alongwith Union and State
Governments and other stakeholders are equally bound by the mandate under Part-IV of the
Constitution for its equitable distribution. This duty is predicated on the independent, efficient,
objective functioning of the electricity commissions. They must guard themselves against ‘regulatory
failure’ and in particular ‘regulatory capture’. The interpretation of the powers and function of the
Regulatory Commissions have to be such that there is no regulatory vacuum, in that there is no
unallocated residue of power of regulation.
IV. Tariff determination is a regulatory function and it is the exclusive province of the Regulatory
Commissions. Tariff determination involves multiple variables requiring the regulators to act with
expertise and also with certain amount of flexibility. Creation of regulatory asset is a ‘measure’ that
the Commission adopts for good governance of tariff. It is also a recognition of revenue recoverable
by distribution companies, and as such, it is an enforceable right, though only through tariff
determination for later years. This ‘measure’ gives rise to correlative obligations of the Regulatory
Commissions to manage it efficiently and allow easy liquidation.
V. Disproportionate increase and long pending regulatory asset depict a ‘regulatory failure’. It has
serious consequences on all stakeholders and the ultimate burden is only on the consumer. VI. Laws
encompassing the creation, continuation, and liquidation of a ‘regulatory asset’ are located in the
Act, National Tariff Plan and Policy, Rules, and Regulations made under the Act, as interpreted by
the APTEL. The combined effect of this legal regime is the statutory obligation on the regulator(s).
VII. Ineffective and inefficient functioning of the Regulatory Commissions, coupled with acting
under dictation can lead to regulatory failure. The commissions are accountable for their decisions,
and they are subject to judicial review. VIII. Apart from examining the legality and propriety of the
orders of the Commissions in appeal, the APTEL has extraordinary powers under Section 121 to
issue orders, instructions or directions for effective enforcement of the regulatory regime. This is
one of the most important powers allocated to APTEL by the Parliament. IX. We have affirmed the
limits of creation, continuation and liquidation of the regulatory asset, recognised the obligations of
the Regulatory Commissions, and directed that they will be accountable and subject to such orders,
instructions or directions as the APTEL may issue in this regard under Section 121.
X. The regulatory regime under the Act is a complete code enunciating rights, prescribing
obligations, and laying down the mechanism for course correction. The effectiveness of these laws
will be reflected in the will to enforce them.
12. Directions.
71. For the reasons state above, we issue the following directions:
(i) As a first principle, tariff shall be cost-reflective;
(ii) The revenue gap between the approved ARR and the estimated annual revenue
from approved tariff may be in exceptional circumstances;
(iii) The regulatory asset should not exceed a reasonable percentage, which
percentage can be arrived on the basis of Rule 23 of the Electricity Rules that
prescribes 3% of the ARR as the guiding principle;
(iv) If a regulatory asset is created, it must be liquidated within a period of 3 years,
taking Rule 23 as the guiding principle;
(v) The existing regulatory asset must be liquidated in a maximum of 4 years starting
from 01.04.2024, taking Rule 23 as the guiding principle;
(vi) Regulatory Commissions must provide the trajectory and roadmap for liquidation of the existing
regulatory asset, which will include a provision for dealing with carrying costs. Regulatory
Commissions must also undertake strict and intensive audit of the circumstances in which the
distribution companies have continued without recovery of the regulatory asset;
(vii) Regulatory Commissions shall in general follow the principles governing creation, continuation
and liquidation of the regulatory asset, as laid down in paragraph 70, and also abide by the
directions of the APTEL summarised in paragraph 69.8;
(viii) The APTEL shall invoke its powers under Section 121 and issue such orders, instructions or
directions as it may deem fit to the Regulatory Commissions for performance of their duties with
respect to regulatory asset as enunciated by us in this judgment and as per the orders of the APTEL
in O.P. No. 1/2011 dated 11.11.2011 and O.P. Nos. 1 and 2/2012 dated 14.11.2013.
(ix) The APTEL shall register a suo moto petition under Section 121 of the Act to monitor
implementation of above directions (v) and (vi) till the conclusion of the period mentioned therein.
72. With these directions, the present writ petitions in W.P. (C) No. 104/2014, W.P. (C) No.
105/2014 and W.P. (C) No. 1005/2021 and the present civil appeals in C.A. No. 4010/2014 and C.A.
No. 4013/2014 against the APTEL’s order dated 11.03.2014 stand disposed of.
………………………………....J. [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] ………………………………....J.
[SANDEEP MEHTA] NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 06, 2025