C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May,
2025
Author: Sanjay Kumar
Bench: Sanjay Kumar
                                                                                        
2025 INSC 661
                                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 941 – 945 OF 2004
                             C.T. KOCHOUSEPH                                       .....
                                                           VERSUS
                             STATE OF KERALA AND ANOTHER ETC.                      .....
                                                                       WITH
                                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4745 OF 2007
                                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4746 OF 2007
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1937 – 1939 OF 2008
                                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6055 OF 2008
                                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 938 – 939 OF 2009
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3024 – 3025 OF 2012
                                                                       AND
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NOS. _________ OF 2025
                                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 9420
                                                              JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, CJI.
Leave granted in SLP (C) Nos. 9420-9422 of 2012.
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
1


2. This judgment decides a batch of matters pertaining to Section 5A of the Kerala General Sales Tax
Act, 19631 and the pari materia provision of Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act,
1959.2
3. The following issues arise for our consideration:
I. Whether the purchase of goods by the appellants from dealers who were exempted
from payment of tax by virtue of notifications or exemptions issued under the Kerala
Act or the Tamil Nadu Act, is a purchase "which is liable to tax" within the meaning of
Section 5A of the Kerala Act or Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act?
II. Whether the appellant-assessee who had purchased goods, that were exempt from
payment of sales tax or from the dealers who were exempt from payment of sales tax,
are liable to pay purchase tax under Section 5A of the Kerala Act or Section 7A of the
Tamil Nadu Act?
III. Whether the purchase tax, as imposed by Section 5A of the Kerala Act or Section
7A of the Tamil Nadu Act, is a tax in the nature of manufacture or consignment tax or
an inter-state levy, and therefore ultra vires the Constitution and beyond the
legislative powers of the state legislature?
4. At the outset, it is important to note that this is essentially a legacy dispute.
Following the enactment and enforcement of the Value Added Tax in 2005 and the Goods and
Services Tax Acts in 2017, the legal issue in question no longer arises for consideration under the
current legal framework. 1 For short, “Kerala Act”.
2 For short, “Tamil Nadu Act”.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
5. At this stage, it will be apposite to quote the relevant statutory provisions of both the Kerala and
Tamil Nadu Acts.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 “Section 2(g) “dealer” means any person who carries on the
business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash,
or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, and
includes –
(i) A local authority, company, Hindu undivided family, firm or other association of persons which
carries on such business;
(ii) a causal trader,
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
2


(iii) a factor, a broker, a commission agent or arhati, a del credere agent or an auctioneer, or any
other mercantile agent by whatever name called, and whether of the same description as
hereinbefore or not, who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods
on behalf of any principal, or through whom the goods are bought, sold, supplied or distributed;
(iv) every local branch of a firm or company situated outside the State;
(v) a person engaged in the business of transfer otherwise than in pursuance of a contract of
property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(vi) a person engaged in the business of transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some
other form) involved in the execution of a works contract;
(vii) a person engaged in the business of delivery of goods on hire purchase or any system of
payment by instalments;
(viii) a person engaged in the business of transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose
(whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(ix) a person engaged in the business of supplying by way of, or as part of, any service or in any other
manner whatsoever of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink
(whether or not intoxicating), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other
valuable consideration;
Explanation (1)- A society (including a co-operative society), club or firm or an association which,
whether or not in the course of business, buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods from or to its
members for cash, or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable
consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act .
Explanation (2)- The Central Government or any State Government which, whether or not in the
course of business, buy, sell, supply or distribute goods, directly or otherwise, for cash, or for
deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be
deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act;
XX XX XX Section 2(j) “goods” means all kinds of movable property (other than newspapers,
actionable claims, stocks and shares and securities) and includes all materials, commodities, and
articles including the goods( as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works
contract or those goods to be used in the fitting out, improvement or repair of movable property;
and all growing crops, grass or things attached to, or forming part of the land which are agreed to be
severed before sale or under the contract of sale;
XX XX XX Section 2(n) “sale” with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
every transfer of the property in goods (other than by way of mortgage, hypothecation, charge or
pledge) by one person to another in the course of business for cash, deferred payment or other
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
3


valuable consideration and includes –
(i) a transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a contract, of property in any goods of cash, deferred
payment or other valuable consideration;
(ii) a transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the
execution of a works contract;
(iii) a delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by installments;
(iv) a transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period)
for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(v) a supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a member thereof for
cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(vi) a supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being
food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) where
such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, and such
transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person
making (such) the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom
such transfer, delivery or supply is made;
Explanation (3)-(a) The sale of purchase of goods shall be deemed for the purpose of this Act, to
have taken place in the State, wherever the contract of sale or purchase might have been made, if the
goods are within the State-
(i) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time the contract of sale or purchase is made;
and
(ii) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time of their appropriation to the contract of
sale or purchase by the seller or by the purchaser, whether the assent of the other party is prior or
subsequent to such appropriation.
Explanation (3)-(b) Where there is a single contract of sale or purchase of goods , situated at more
places than one, the provisions of clause (a) shall apply as if there were separate contracts in respect
of the goods at each of such places.
XX XX XX Section 2(q) “total turnover” means the aggregate turnover in all goods of a dealer at all
places of business in the State, whether or not the whole or any portion of such turnover is liable to
tax; Section 2(r) [“turnover” means the aggregate amount for which goods are bought or sold, or
delivered or supplied or otherwise disposed of in any of the ways referred to in clause (n), by a
dealer] either directly or through another, on his own account or on account of others whether for
cash or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, provided that the proceeds of the sale
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
4


by a person of agricultural or horticultural produce other than tea, [and rubber (natural rubber
latex) and all varieties and grades of raw rubber] grown within the State by himself or on any land in
which he has an interest whether as owner, usufructuary mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, shall be
excluded from his turnover;
Explanation (1)- “Agricultural or horticultural produce” shall not include such produce as has been
subjected to any physical, chemical or other process for being made fit for consumption, save mere
cleaning, grading, sorting or dying;
Explanation (1-A).- Any amount charged by a dealer by way of tax separately without including the
same in the price of the goods bought or sold shall not be included in the turnover. Explanation (2)-
Subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed in this behalf-
(i)[………] Explanation (2) (ii) the amount for which goods are sold shall include any sums charged
for anything done by the dealer in respect of the goods sold at the time of, or before the delivery
thereof;
Explanation (2) (iii) any cash or other discount on the price allowed in respect of any sale and any
amount refunded in respect of articles returned by customers shall not be included in the turnover;
and Explanation (2) (iv) where for accommodating a particular customer, a dealer obtains goods
from another dealer and immediately disposes of the same to the said customer, the sale in respect
of such goods shall be included in the turnover of the latter dealer but not in that of the former;
Explanation (3)- Any amount realised by a dealer by way of sale of his business as a whole, shall not
be included in the turnover. Explanation (4)-The aggregate amount for which the goods are bought
or sold or delivered or supplied through a factor, broker, commission agent or arhati, del credere
agent or an auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, whether for cash or
for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be the turnover of such
factor, broker, commission agent, arhati, del credere agent, auctioneer or any other mercantile
agent, by whatever name called.
XX XX XX Section 3. Levy of taxes on sales or purchases of goods.- (1) Every dealer (other than the
dealer, casual trader or agent of a non- resident dealer) whose total turnover for a year [exceeds
three lakhs of rupees] and every casual trader or agent of a non- resident dealer, whatever be his
turnover for the year, shall pay a tax for each year in accordance with the provisions of this act.
2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), in the case of goods mentioned in the First Schedule,
the tax under this Act shall be payable by a dealer at the rate and [only] at the point specified therein
on the turnover in each year relating to such goods:
Provided that all spare parts, components and accessories of such goods shall also be
taxed at the same rate as that of the goods if such spare parts, components and
accessories are not specifically enumerated in the First Schedule and made liable to
tax under that Schedule;
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
5


[Provided further that in the case of goods mentioned in the First Schedule which are
taxable at the point of first sale, the tax under this Act shall be payable by the first or
earliest of the successive dealers in the State who is liable to tax under this section.]
Section 3(2-A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), in the case of goods
mentioned in the Fifth Schedule, the tax under this Act shall be payable by a dealer at
the rate and at the point specified therein on the turnover in each year relating to
such goods:
Provided that in respect of sale by the first dealer to another registered dealer, the
dealer selling the goods shall furnish to the assessing authority in the prescribed
manner within the prescribed period a declaration duly filled in and signed by the
dealer to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in a
prescribed form, obtained from the prescribed authority.
Section 3(2-B) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), in the case of goods
mentioned in the Sixth Schedule, the tax under this Act shall be payable by a dealer at
the first point of sale and the second point of sale, and at the rate specified therein on
the turnover in each year relating to such goods;
XX XX XX Section 7-A . Levy of purchase Tax. – (1) [Subject to the provisions of
sub-section (1) of section 3, every dealer] who in the course of his business purchases
from a registered dealer or from any other person, any goods, (the sale or purchase of
which is liable to tax under this Act) in circumstances in which [no tax is payable
under (sections 3 or 4,) as the case may be, *[not being a circumstance in which
goods liable to tax under sub-section (2) of section 3 or section 4, were purchased at a
point other than the taxable point specified in the First or the Second Schedule], and
either-
(a) *[consumes or uses such goods in or for the manufacture of other goods for sale
or otherwise; or]
(b) disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State; or
(c) [despatches or carries them] to a place outside the State except as a direct result of
sale or purchase in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce, shall pay tax on the turnover relating to the purchase aforesaid at the rate
mentioned in [sections 3 or 4], as the case may be. Section 8. Exemption from tax. – Subject to such
restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, a dealer who deals in the goods specified in the
Third Schedule shall not be liable to pay any tax under this Act in respect of such goods.
XX XX XX Section 17. Power of Government to notify exemptions and reductions of tax. – (1) The
Government may, by notification, [issued whether prospectively or retrospectively,] make an
exemption, or reduction in rate, in respect of any tax payable under this Act –
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
6


(i) on the sale or purchase of any specified goods or class of goods, at all points or at a specified
point or points in the series of sales by successive dealers; or
(ii) by any specified class of persons, in regard to the whole or any part of their turnover; [or] (iii) on
the sale or purchase of any specified classes of goods by specified classes of dealers in regard to the
whole or part of their turnover.
Section 17(4) The Government may, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, by notification, remit the whole or any part of the tax or penalty or fee payable in respect
of any period by any dealer under this Act.” Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 “ 5. Levy of tax on
sale or purchase of goods: - (1) Every dealer (other than a casual trader or agent of a non-resident
dealer) whose total turnover for a year is not less than [one lakh rupees] and every casual trader or
agent of a non-resident dealer, whatever be his total turnover for the year, shall pay tax on his
taxable turnover for that year,––
(i) in the case of goods specified in the First or Second Schedule, at the rates and only at the points
specified against such goods in the said Schedule;
[xxx]
(iii) in the case of transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a
specified period) at the rate of [six per cent] at all points of such transfer on an aggregate turnover of
[rupees one lakh] and above;
[(iv) (a) in the case of transfer of goods involved in the execution of works contract where transfer is
in the form of goods at the rates and at the points specified against such goods in the First, Second
or Fifth Schedule [ x x x ]
(b) In the case of transfer of goods involved in the execution of works contract (where the transfer is
not in the form of goods but in some other form) specified in the Fourth Schedule, at the rate
specified against such contract in the said Schedule:
Provided that no tax is payable in respect of the turnover of goods the transfer of
which was effected without any processing or manufacture on which tax was levied
under clause (i) on any earlier sale in the State or which are exempted from tax and
for goods coming under the Fifth Schedule, no tax specified for the first sale is
payable, on which tax was levied in any earlier sale in the State:
Provided further that tax payable in respect of turnover of goods coming under the
second schedule the transfer of which was effected without any processing or
manufacture shall not exceed the rate and only at the points specified against such
goods in the said Schedule].
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
7


(v) in the case of goods specified in the Fifth Schedule at the rates and at the two
points specified against such goods in the said Schedule;
[Provided that where there are no two points of sale in the State for any goods coming under the
Fifth Schedule and the first sale is to a person other than a registered dealer, the rate specified in
column (8) of that Schedule shall apply to such sales] [(2) Every dealer other than a dealer referred
to in sub-section (1) whose total turnover for a year in respect of the goods specified in the First or
Second or Fifth Schedule or goods involved in the execution of works contract (whether it is in the
form of goods or in some other form) specified in the Fourth Schedule is not less than [rupees one
lakh] shall pay tax at the rate and only at the point or points specified against the goods in the First
or Second or Fifth Schedule or goods involved in the execution of works contract (whether it is in the
form of goods or in some other form) specified in the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be, on his
taxable turnover in that year relating to such goods:
Provided that where a tax has been levied under sub- section (1) or sub-section (2) of
this section or under section 5A in respect of the sale or purchase or goods specified
in the Second Schedule and such goods are sold in the course of interstate trade or
commerce, the tax so levied shall be refunded to such person in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed [(2A) (i) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder every dealer shall pay turnover tax
on the turnover of goods as specified hereunder, namely:-
(a) by an oil company defined in the Explanation under serial number [97] of the
First Schedule to this Act whose total turnover in a year exceeds rupees fifty Iakhs at
the rate of three per cent on the turnover from the Ist day of April, 1991 till 31st day of
July, 1991 and thereafter at the rate of four per cent on the turnover:
[(b) by any dealer in Foreign Liquor (Indian made) or Foreign Liquor (Foreign made)
as specified in entries against serial numbers 53 and 54 of the First Schedule at the
rate of three per cent on the turnover at all points;
(c) by any dealer in jewellery made of gold, silver and platinum group of metals at the
rate of three per cent on the turnover;
(d) by any dealer in cooked food including beverages not falling under the entries
against serial numbers 53 and 54 of the First Schedule sold or served in hotels and/or
restaurants and not covered by the entries against serial number 40 of the First
Schedule whose turnover in a year.–– exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not Rupees
one thousand exceed rupees ten lakhs exceeds rupees ten lakhs but does not at the
rate of one per cent exceeds rupees twenty five lakhs on the turnover exceeds rupees
twenty five lakhs at the rate of two per cent on the turnover:
Provided that tax under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 5 on such turnover and tax
under section 5A shall not be levied on such dealer;
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
8


(e) by any dealer in medicines and drugs including Allopathic, Ayurvedic, Homoeopathic, Sidha or
Unani preparations or Glucose I. P. at the point of first sale in the State at the rate of half per cent on
the turnover of such goods:
Provided that dealers other than those who receive the goods on branch transfer or
on consignment shall not be liable to pay turnover tax when the total turnover does
not exceed rupees fifty lakhs in the year;
(f) by any dealer in tea at the point of second sale in the State at the rate of three
fourth per cent on the turnover of such good;
(g) by any dealer not coming under sub-clauses (a) to (f) of goods coming under the
First Schedule or the Fifth Schedule whose total turnover in a year exceeds rupees
fifty lakhs at the rate of haIf per cent on the turnover of such goods at all points of
sale or purchase as the case may be.] Provided that no tax under this sub-section
shall be payable on that part of such turnover– [(i) x x x ]
(ii) which relates to:
(a) sale or purchase of goods in the course of interstate trade or commerce:
(b) sale or purchase of goods in the course of export out of the territory of India or
sale or purchase in the course of import into the territory of India;
(c) sale or purchse exempted from tax by notification under section 10;
(d) all amounts falling under the head 'freight', when specified and charged for by the
dealer separately without including such amounts in the price of the goods sold;
(e) all amounts falling under the head 'charges for delivery', when specified and
charged for by the dealer separately without including such amounts in the price of
the goods sold;
(f) all amounts allowed as discount, provided that such discount is allowed in
accordance with the regular practice of the dealer or is in accordance with the terms
of a contract or agreement entered into in a particular case and provided also that the
accounts show that the purchaser has paid only the sum originally charged less
discount;
(g) all amounts allowed to purchasers in respect of goods returned by them to the
dealer when the goods are taxable on sales provided that the goods were returned
within a period of three months from the date of delivery of the goods and the
accounts show the date on which the goods were returned and the date on which and
the amount for which refund was made; and
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
9


(h) all amounts received from the sellers in respect of goods returned to them by the
dealer, when the goods are taxable on the purchase value provided that the goods
were returned within a period of three months from the date of delivery of the goods
and the accounts show the date on which the goods were returned and the date on
which and the amount for which refund was received:
Provided further that save as otherwise provided in this sub-section, no other
deduction shall be made from the total turnover of a dealer for the purposes of this
sub-section.
(ii) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to the assessment, collection or refund of the turnover tax under this
sub-section including the provisions relating to appeals and penalties, as they apply
in relation to the assessment, collection or refund of tax under the other provisions of
this Act.
[(iii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 22, no dealer shall collect
from his purchaser the turnover tax payable by him under this sub-section.] (3) Notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the tax payable by a dealer in respect of any
sale of industrial raw materials, [component parts, containers or packing materials] which is liable
to tax at a rate higher than [two and a half per cent] when sold to industrial units for use in the
production of finished products inside the State for sale or for packing of such finished products
inside the State for sale, as the case may be, shall be at the rate of only [two and a half per cent] on
the taxable turnover relating to such industrial raw materials, [component parts, containers or
packing materials], as the case may be:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply where the sale of such finished
products is not liable to tax either under this Act or under the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956) or when such finished products are exported out of the
territory of India:
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any sale
unless the dealer selling the goods furnishes to the assessing authority in the
prescribed manner a declaration duly filled in and signed by the dealer to whom the
goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in the prescribed form.] [(3A) x x
x x ] (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every dealer
registered under sub-section (3) of section 7 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
(Central Act 74 of 1956), shall, whatever be the quantum of his total turnover, pay tax
for each year in respect of the sale of the goods with reference to the purchase of
which he has furnished a declaration under sub-section (4) of section 8 of the
aforesaid Central Act [on his taxable turnover in respect of such goods:] Provided
that this sub-section shall not apply to any dealer in respect of the sale of the goods
the purchase of which is liable to tax under subsection (1).
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
10


[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub- section (2), but subject to
sub-section (6), where goods sold are contained in containers or are packed in any packing
materials, the rate of tax and the point of levy applicable to such containers or packing materials, as
the case may be, shalI, whether the price of the containers or the packing materials is charged
separately or not be the same as those applicable to goods contained or packed, and in determining
turnover of the goods, the turnover in respect of the containers or packing materials shall be
included therein.
(6) Where the sale or purchases of goods, contained in any containers or packed in any packing
materials is exempt from tax, then, the sale or purchase of such containers or packing materials
shall also be exempt from tax.
Explanation:– In sub-section (5) and sub-section (6), the word "containers'' includes gunny bags,
tins, bottles or any other containers.] 5A. Levy of purchase tax:–(1) Every dealer who, in the course
of his business, purchases from a registered dealer or from any other person any goods, the sale or
purchase of which is liable to tax under this Act, in circumstances in which no tax is payable under
[Sub-Sections (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of Section 5] and either:–
(a) consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise: or
(b) [uses or] disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the state; or
(c) despatches them to any place outside the State except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the
course of inter-state trade or commerce; shall, whatever be the quantum of the turnover relating to
such purchase for a year, pay tax on the taxable turnover relating to such purchase for the year at the
rates mentioned in Section 5.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), a dealer (other than a casual trader or
agent of a non-resident dealer purchasing goods, the sale of which is liable to tax under section 5,
shall not be liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) if his total turnover for a year less than [one lakh
rupees]:
Provided that where the total turnover of such dealer for the year in respect of the
goods mentioned in clause (i) of sub- section (1) of section 5 is not less than [fifty
thousand rupees], he shall be liable to pay tax on the taxable turnover in respect of
those goods.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a
dealer referred to in sub-section (1), who purchases goods, the sale of which is liable
to tax under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of Section 5, and whose total turnover for a
year is not less than [one lakh rupees] but not more than [one lakh ten thousand
rupees] may, at his option instead of paying the tax in accordance with the provisions
of subsection (1), pay tax [at the rate] mentioned in [ x x x x ] sub-section (1) of
Section 7 in accordance with the provisions of that section.” SUMMARY OF THE
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
11


STATUTORY POSITION
6. A brief overview of the relevant statutory provisions is set out below:
• Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Act is the charging provision. It imposes a liability to
pay tax on every dealer whose annual turnover exceeds the prescribed threshold, as
well as on every casual dealer and agent of a non-resident dealer. The tax is payable
on the dealer’s taxable turnover at the rates specified under the Act. Section 3 does
not differentiate between sale and purchase. The heading refers to ‘sales or purchase’.
• The term ‘turnover’ is defined in section 2(r) of the Tamil Nadu Act to include the
total value of goods bought, sold, supplied or distributed by a dealer, whether directly
or through others, and whether on the dealer’s own account or on behalf of another.
However, the definition excludes the sale proceeds of agricultural or horticultural
produce, except where the produce is tea grown in Tamil Nadu either by the dealer or
on land in which the dealer holds an interest. The Explanation to this provision
clarifies that produce which has undergone physical, chemical or other processing for
the purpose of making it fit for consumption ceases to be treated as agricultural
produce. This exclusion does not apply where the processing is limited to cleaning,
grading, sorting or drying.
• Section 3(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act further provides that, in the case of goods
enumerated in the First Schedule, tax is payable at the rate and point of levy specified
therein, irrespective of the dealer’s aggregate turnover.
• Section 8 of the Tamil Nadu Act deals with exemptions and states that no tax shall
be payable on the sale of goods specified in the Third Schedule, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.
• Section 17 of the Tamil Nadu Act empowers the State Government to grant, by
notification, either full or partial exemptions from tax or reductions in the rate of tax.
Such notifications may apply to particular goods or classes of goods, at all or specific
points of sale, or to particular dealers or classes of dealers in respect of the whole or
any part of their turnover. These exemptions may apply generally throughout the
State or be confined to specified local areas and may be subject to conditions or
restrictions. The Government is also empowered to vary or cancel such notifications.
• Section 18 of the Tamil Nadu Act provides that where a dealer contravenes any
condition or restriction specified in a notification issued under section 17, the
exemption shall be deemed not to have been granted, and the dealer shall be liable to
pay tax accordingly.
• Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act, introduced by Act 1 of 1959, imposes a purchase
tax in circumstances where no tax is payable under sections 3, 4, or 5. It applies
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
12


where a dealer purchases goods liable to tax and the goods are (i) used in the
manufacture of other goods, (ii) disposed of otherwise than by sale within the State,
or (iii) sent outside Tamil Nadu otherwise than by way of inter-State sale. In such
cases, the purchasing dealer is liable to pay tax on the purchase aforesaid at the
applicable rate mentioned in Section 3 or 4.
• The provisions of the Kerala Act reflect a framework broadly similar to that of the
Tamil Nadu Act, particularly in relation to charging, exemptions, and the imposition
of purchase tax.
• Section 5 of the Kerala Act is the charging section. It provides that every dealer
whose turnover exceeds the prescribed threshold, as well as every casual dealer and
agent of a non-resident dealer, is liable to pay tax on the turnover for that year. In the
case of goods specified in the First or Second Schedule, the tax is payable at the rate
and at the point of levy specified therein. The heading reads — “levy of tax on sale or
purchase of goods”.
• Section 5A of the Kerala Act3 is in pari materia to section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act.
It provides for the levy of purchase tax in specified circumstances. The section applies
where a dealer, in the course of business, purchases goods that are liable to tax, from
either a registered dealer or any other person, but no tax is payable under section 5 in
respect of such transaction. If such goods are (i) consumed in the manufacture of
other goods, whether for sale or otherwise, (ii) used or disposed of in a manner other
than by sale within the State, or (iii) dispatched to a place outside the State, except
where such dispatch is in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, the dealer
becomes 3 Inserted by Act 14 of 1970.
liable to pay tax on the purchase turnover relating to such goods. The rate applicable shall be as
specified in section 5. DECISIONS OF THIS COURT INTERPRETING SIMILAR OR IDENTICAL
PROVISIONS
7. A three-Judges Bench of this Court in State of Tamil Nadu v.
M.K.Kandaswami and Others,4 way back in the year 1975, had interpreted Section 7A of the Madras
General Sales Tax Act, 1959.5 On analysis of sub- section (1) to Section 7A, this Court delineated the
following ingredients that must be cumulatively satisfied for the purpose of levy :
i. The person who purchases the goods is a dealer;
ii. The purchase is made by him in the course of his business;
iii. Such purchase is either from a registered dealer or from any other person;
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
13


iv. The goods purchased are goods, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under
the Madras Act;
v. Such purchase is in the circumstances in which no tax is payable under Sections 3,
4 or 5 of the Madras Act; and vi. The dealer either consumes such goods in the
manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise, or despatches such goods in any
manner other than by way of sale in the State, or despatches them to a place outside
the State except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce.
4 (1975) 4 SCC 745.
5 For short, “Madras Act”.
8. To effectuate the object and purpose of the enactment of Section 7A of the Madras Act, or for that
matter Section 5A of the Kerala Act, this Court outright rejected the contention, reversing the
decision of the High Court, inter alia, holding that when the sale is exempt and therefore not to be
included in the turnover of the dealer selling the goods, the exemption would equally enure to the
benefit of the purchaser who is liable to pay tax in terms of Section 7A(1) of the Madras Act. This is
unacceptable as it would render Section 7A(1) wholly nugatory. Clarifying the distinction between
three inter-related but distinct concepts, namely, ‘taxable person’, ‘taxable goods’ and ‘taxable
event’, which must be satisfied before a person can be saddled with tax liability, it is observed that
conflating the three could result in a serious error in the interpretation and application of the
Madras Act. Referring to Section 7A as the charging provision read with Section 3(2) and the
definition clauses of the term ‘goods’ in Section 2(j), ‘dealer’ in Section 2(g) and ‘sale’ in Section 2(n)
in the context of ‘taxable person’, ‘taxable goods’ and ‘taxable event’, it is held, that the expression –
“goods, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under the Act”, refers to the character and class
of goods in relation to their exigibility. Essentially, this expression is held to define “taxable goods”,
that is, goods listed in the First Schedule of the Act, the sale or purchase of which is subject to tax at
the specified rate and point of levy. The words “the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under
the Act” qualify the term “goods” and, by necessary implication, exclude goods that are totally
exempt from tax “at all points”6 under Section 8 or Section 17(1). Such “exempt goods”,7 not being
“taxable goods”, cannot be brought to charge under Section 7-A.
9. Elaborating further on the contours of Section 7A, viz. the expression “under the Act”,
M.K.Kandaswami (supra), elucidates that Section 7A creates a separate and independent charge
which is distinct and not subject to Section
3. In effect, Section 7A is a charging provision itself, intended to bring to tax goods which, under
normal circumstances, would have been taxed at some point in the State, but in the circumstances,
no tax was payable under Sections 3, 4 or 5 of the Madras Act. Section 7A brings such goods to tax at
the hands of the purchaser, provided the purchaser is a dealer, in the following three alternative
circumstances:
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
14


a) when he consumes the goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or
otherwise, or
b) despatches them in any manner other than by way of sale in the State, or
c) despatches them to a place outside the State, except as a direct result of sale or
purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Referring to ingredient (iv) and (v)8, it is observed that these are not mutually exclusive; the
existence of one does not necessarily negate or preclude the other. In fact, ingredients (iv) and (v)
can co-exist harmoniously. Ingredient (iv) 6 Both — sale or purchase.
7 ‘Exempt goods’ here, as explained hereinafter, refers to goods on which no sales or purchase tax
can be levied.
8 Ingredient (iv). The goods purchased are goods, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under
the Madras Act.
Ingredient (v). Such purchase is in the circumstances in which no tax is payable under Sections 3, 4
or 5 of the Madras Act.
is satisfied if the particular goods in question are shown to qualify as ‘taxable goods’. However, there
may be a particular circumstance in a given case, because of which the sale or purchase does not
attract tax under Sections 3, 4 or 5 of the Madras Act. Section 7A addresses such situations by
imposing a tax on the purchasing dealers’ purchase turnover, provided that one of the alternative
conditions — (a), (b) or (c) to Section 7A(1) — is fulfilled.
10. M.K.Kandaswami (supra) also considers Section 5A of the Kerala Act and interprets it in the
same manner. Specific reference was made to a decision of the Single Judge of the High Court of
Kerala in Malabar Fruit Products Company, Bharananganam Kottayam and Others v. Sales Tax
Officer, Palai and Others 9 wherein the constitutional validity of Section 5A was challenged. The
Single Judge upheld the validity of Section 5A and elucidated the legislative scheme by giving
examples. For instance, in a case where a sale is made by the seller whose turnover is below the
specified minimum, the purchaser may be liable to pay tax on the purchase in the circumstances
mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 5A(1). Another example considers the sale of
agricultural or horticultural produce, which is excluded from the turnover of the seller. In this
scenario, although the person selling such produce is treated as a ‘dealer’, such sale is not part of his
turnover; the purchaser may nonetheless be taxed under Section 5A, when agricultural or
horticultural produce are “goods liable to tax” and the conditions thereof are satisfied. This
judgment was upheld by the Division Bench of the High Court of 9 (1972) 30 STC 537 (Ker).
Kerala in Yusuf Shabeer and Others v. State of Kerala and Others.10 Approving the view taken in
Yusuf Shabeer (supra), this Court observed:
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
15


“34. In our opinion, the Kerala High Court has correctly construed Section 5-A of the
Kerala Act which is in pari materia with the impugned Section 7-A of the Madras Act.
“Goods the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under this Act in Section 7-A(1)”
means “taxable goods”, that is, the kind of goods, the sale of which by a particular
person or dealer may not be taxable in the hands of seller but the purchase of the
same by a dealer in the course of his business may subsequently become taxable. We
have pointed out and it needs to be emphasised again that Section 7-A itself is a
charging section. It creates a liability against a dealer on his purchase turnover with
regard to goods, the sale or purchase of which though generally liable to tax under the
Act, have not due to the circumstances of particular sales, suffered tax under Sections
3, 4 or 5, and which after the purchase, have been dealt by him in any of the modes
indicated in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 7-A(1).” In view of the reasoning given,
the appeals preferred by the State of Tamil Nadu were allowed and the judgment of
the High Court was reversed. The decisions of the High Court of Kerala in Malabar
Fruit Products (supra) and Yusuf Shabeer (supra), as observed above, were approved.
11. We have examined the judgment of this Court in State of Kerala v.
T.S.Govindarajulu Naidu,11 which upheld the judgment of the High Court of Kerala in T.S.
Govindarajalu Naidu v. State of Kerala.12 In our view, the Division Bench of the High Court of
Kerala misapplied the ratio laid down in M.K. Kandaswami (supra) in accepting the assessee’s
contention. M.K. Kandaswami (supra) involved an exemption granted under Section 17(1) of the
Tamil Nadu Act on the sale of goods. Misinterpreting the ratio in M.K. Kandaswami (supra), the
High Court held that the exemption extended to both 10 (1973) 32 STC 359 (Ker).
11 1993 Supp 3 SCC 656.
12 (1979) 43 STC 233 (Kerala).
sales tax and purchase tax, thereby excluding the applicability of purchase tax under Section 7A of
the Tamil Nadu Act or the pari materia provision of Section 5A of the Kerala Act. Unfortunately, this
aspect was not addressed in the brief judgment delivered by this Court in T.S.Govindarajulu Naidu
(supra) which dismissed the State’s appeal against the High Court’s decision. This Court recorded
that an exemption had been granted under Section 10 of the Kerala Act and observed that the
exemption applied to the payment of tax under the Act, encompassing both sales and purchase tax.
12. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Goodyear India Ltd. and Others v. State of Haryana and
Another13 examined the relevant provisions of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act, 197314 as well as
the scope, effect, and validity of Section 13-AA of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959.15 The Court
referred to its earlier judgment in M.K.Kandaswami (supra) which was relied upon by the Revenue
but was sought to be distinguished on the ground that the legal question involved was different. The
contention of the assessee was accepted. The Court observed that Section 9 of the Haryana Act
begins with the words, “where a dealer liable to pay tax under the Act,” rather than “whether a
dealer has paid tax or has not paid tax.” The phrase “liable to pay tax under the Act” refers to the
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
16


obligation to pay sales tax on certain purchases. The Court clarified that the liability to pay tax arises
upon the occurrence of a taxable event, that is, the event that gives rise to the charge. Although the
assessment and actual recovery of tax may happen later, the liability is triggered by this taxable
event. The imposition of tax involves three stages. First, the declaration 13 (1990) 2 SCC 71.
14 For short, “Haryana Act”.
15 For short, “Bombay Act”.
of liability. This is established by the statute and defines who is legally bound to pay tax. Second,
assessment, which quantifies the liability, but does not create it; the liability already exists under the
law. Lastly, recovery, this is initiated when the taxpayer fails to pay voluntarily. Crucially, the
liability to pay tax arises on the occurrence of the taxable event, it does not exist or accrue prior to
that event, nor can it arise at a later point in time. Referring to the clauses of Section 9, the Court
held that the key phrase attracting taxation is:
“goods, the sale and purchase of which is liable to tax under the Act.” This phrase
relates to the nature and category of goods in terms of their taxability.
13. Contrary to the interpretation in M.K.Kandaswami (supra), the decision in
Goodyear (supra) observes that Section 9 of the Haryana Act does not itself impose
purchase tax merely on the act of purchasing taxable goods. Instead, the tax is
imposed when these goods are used in such a way that they lose their original identity
and are transformed into new taxable goods or goods which are then dispatched
outside the State. Only at that stage is the tax levied, and the liability to pay arises.
While referring again to M.K.Kandaswami (supra) and specifically to ingredients (iv)
and (v) mentioned therein, the Court noted that ingredient (vi)16 was neither argued
nor properly considered in that case. Instead, only a brief mention was made
regarding the wording of the section. The Court then referred to constitutional
provisions, including the Constitution (Forty-Sixth Amendment) Act, 1982 and Entry
54 of List II in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, to hold that no tax is
payable
16 Ingredient (vi). The dealer either consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale
or otherwise, or despatches such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State, or
despatches them to a place outside the State except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce.
under the Haryana Act when goods are exported outside the State in the course of an inter-State
sale.
14. In his concurring opinion, Ranganathan J. observed that Section 9 of the Haryana Act and
Section 13-AA of the Bombay Act both aim to levy purchase tax, but the tax does not become payable
at the moment of purchase. Instead, liability arises later, if the purchaser either uses the goods to
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
17


manufacture other taxable goods, or dispatches the manufactured goods to a place of business
outside the State, other than by way of inter-State sale or export.
15. At this point, it is important to note the distinction in the wording of Section 9 of the Haryana
Act. As stated in paragraph 8 of Goodyear (supra), the amended Section brought within its scope the
purchase of goods (other than those listed in Schedule B) from within the State, when such goods
are used to manufacture other goods, or when the manufactured goods are disposed of outside the
State other than by way of inter-State sale or export.
16. A similar issue with reference to the Gujarat Sales Tax Act, 1969, 17 Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act,
194818 as well as the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 195719 was examined by a three-Judge
Bench of this Court, which included Ranganathan, J., in Hotel Balaji and Others v. State of A.P. and
Others.20 Jeevan Reddy, J., writing for himself and Ramaswami, J., referred to some earlier
judgments and concurred with the opinion expressed in M.K.Kandaswami (supra), while
disagreeing with the ratio in Goodyear (supra). The ratio in Goodyear (supra), it was stated, cannot
be accepted for 17 For short, “Gujarat Act.” 18 For short, “Uttar Pradesh Act”.
19 For short, “Andhra Pradesh Act”.
20 1993 Supp (4) SCC 536.
detailed reasons being set out in Part-V of the judgment. Referring to the relevant State enactments,
it was stated that where a purchaser uses goods as raw material, processing material, or consumable
stores in the manufacture of taxable goods, purchase tax becomes leviable upon the occurrence of
such events. In such a situation, it is immaterial whether the manufactured goods are sold within
the State or dealt with in some other manner, including consigning to the manufacturer’s own
depots or to the depots of his agents outside the State. The contention that such a levy amounts to
excise duty or use tax—since it attaches on the use of goods in manufacturing of other goods and not
on the purchase of goods—was rejected as missing the true nature of the tax. This Court clarified
that such a tax is on the purchase price of raw materials used in the manufacture of goods, not on
the value of manufactured products. A concession granted to the manufacturers in the purchase of
certain types of raw material etc. does not preclude the imposition of purchase tax when the
statutory conditions viz. happening of certain events are met. On the question whether the decision
in Goodyear (supra) requires reconsideration, it is observed as under:
“90. The crucial question, therefore, is what is the basis of taxation in either of the
above provisions? In other words, the question is whether levy of tax is on the
purchase of goods or upon the consignment of the manufactured goods? Let us first
deal with Section 9 of the Haryana Act (as amended in 1983). Properly analysed, the
following are the ingredients of the Section : (i) a dealer liable to pay tax under the
Act purchases goods (other than those specified in Schedule B) from any source in
the State and (ii) uses them in the State in the manufacture of any other goods and
(iii) either disposes of the manufactured goods in any manner otherwise than by way
of sale in the State or despatches the manufactured goods to a place outside the State
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
18


in any manner otherwise than by way of sale in the course of a inter-State trade or
commerce or in the course of export outside the territory of India within the meaning
of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. If all the above three
ingredients are satisfied, the dealer becomes liable to pay tax on the purchase of such
goods at such rate, as may be notified under Section 15.
91. Now, what does the above analysis signify? The section applies only in those cases
where (a) the goods are purchased (for convenience sake, I may refer to them as raw
material) by a dealer liable to pay tax under the Act in the State, (b) the goods so
purchased cease to exist as such goods for the reason they are consumed in the
manufacture of different commodities and
(c) such manufactured commodities are either disposed of within the State otherwise
than by way of sale or despatched to a place outside the State otherwise than by way
of an inter-State sale or export sale. It is evident that if such manufactured goods are
not sold within the State of Haryana, but yet disposed of within the State, no tax is
payable on such disposition; similarly, where manufactured goods are despatched out
of State as a result of an inter-State sale or export sale, no tax is payable on such sale.
Similarly again where such manufactured goods are taken out of State to manufacturers' own depots
or to the depots of his agents, no tax is payable on such removal. Goodyear takes only the last
eventuality and holds that the taxable event is the removal of goods from the State and since such
removal is to dealers' own depots/agents outside the State, it is consignment, which cannot be taxed
by the State legislature. With the greatest respect at our command, we beg to disagree. The levy
created by the said provision is a levy on the purchase of raw material purchased within the State
which is consumed in the manufacture of other goods within the State. If, however, the
manufactured goods are sold within the State, no purchase tax is collected on the raw material,
evidently because the State gets larger revenue by taxing the sale of such goods. (The value of
manufactured goods is bound to be higher than the value of the raw material.) The State legislature
does not wish to — in the interest of trade and general public — tax both the raw material and the
finished (manufactured) product. This is a well-known policy in the field of taxation. But where the
manufactured goods are not sold within the State but are yet disposed of or where the manufactured
goods are sent outside the State (otherwise than by way of inter-State sale or export sale) the tax has
to be paid on the purchase value of the raw material. The reason is simple:
if the manufactured goods are disposed of otherwise than by sale within the State or
are sent out of State (i.e., consigned to dealers own depots or agents), the State does
not get any revenue because no sale of manufactured goods has taken place within
Haryana. In such a situation, the State says, it would retain the levy and collect it
since there is no reason for waiving the purchase tax in these two situations. Now
coming to inter-State sale and export sale, it may be noticed that in the case of inter-
State sale, the State of Haryana does get the tax revenue — may be not to the full
extent. Though the Central Sales Tax is levied and collected by the Government of
India, Article 269 of the Constitution provides for making over the tax collected to the
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
19


States in accordance with certain principles. Where, of course, the sale is an export
sale within the meaning of Section 5(1) of the Central Sales Tax Act (export sales) the
State may not get any revenue but larger national interest is served thereby. It is for
these reasons that tax on the purchase of raw material is waived in these two
situations. Thus, there is a very sound and consistent policy underlying the provision.
The object is to tax the purchase of goods by a manufacturer whose existence as such
goods is put an end to by him by using them in the manufacture of different goods in
certain circumstances. The tax is levied upon the purchase price of raw material, not
upon the sale price — or consignment value — of manufactured goods. Would it be
right to say that the levy is upon consignment of manufactured goods in such a case?
True it is that the levy materialises only when the purchased goods (raw material) is
consumed in the manufacture of different goods and those goods are disposed of
within the State otherwise than by way of sale or are consigned to the
manufacturing-dealer's depots/agents outside the State of Haryana. But does that
change the nature and character of the levy? Does such postponement — if one can
call it as such — convert what is avowedly a purchase tax on raw material (levied on
the purchase price of such raw material) to a consignment tax on the manufactured
goods? We think not. Saying otherwise would defeat the very object and purpose of
Section 9 and amount to its nullification in effect. The most that can perhaps be said
is that it is plausible (as pointed out by Ranganathan, J. in his separate opinion) to
characterise the said tax both as purchase tax as well as consignment tax. But where
two interpretations are possible, one which sustains the constitutionality and/or
effectuates its purpose and intendment and the other which effectively nullifies the
provision, the former must be preferred, according to all known canons of
interpretation. This is also the view expressly approved by Mukharji, J. in his
opinion, as pointed out hereinbefore. In para 71 of his opinion, the learned Judge
states:
“It is well settled that reasonable construction should be followed and literal
construction may be avoided if that defeats the manifest object and purpose of the
Act. See C.W.T. v. Kripashankar Dayashankar Worah and Income Tax Commissioner
for City of London v. Gibbs” (emphasis supplied)”
92. However, we would presently show that merely because the levy attaches on the
happening or non-happening of a subsequent event, the nature and character of the
levy does not change. In several enactments, for instance, tax is levied at the last sale
point or last purchase point, as the case may be. How does one determine the last
purchase point in the State? Only when one knows that no purchase took place within
the State thereafter. But that can only be known later. If there is a subsequent
purchase within the State, the purchase in question ceases to be the last purchase. As
pointed out pertinently by P.S. Poti, J. (as he then was) in Malabar Fruit Products Co.
v. S.T.O. [(1972) 30 STC 537 (Ker)] applying the logic of the dealers, it would not be
possible to tax any goods at the last purchase point in the State, inasmuch as the last
purchase point in regard to any goods could be determined only when the goods are
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
20


sold later and not when the goods are purchased. In the said decision, the learned
Judge was dealing with the validity and construction of Section 5-A of Kerala General
Sales Tax Act, 1963, sub-section (1) whereof read as follows:
“5-A. Levy of purchase tax.— (1) Every dealer who in the course of his business
purchases from a registered dealer or from any other person any goods, the sale or
purchase of which is liable to tax under this Act, in circumstances in which no tax is
payable under Section 5, and either—
(a) consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise; or
(b) disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State; or
(c) despatches them to any place outside the State except as a direct result of sale or
purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce;
shall, whatever be the quantum of the turnover relating to such purchase for a year, pay tax on the
taxable turnover relating to such purchase for that year at the rates mentioned in Section 5.””
17. Referring to the argument and discussion on the validity of Section 5A of the Kerala Act in
Malabar Fruit Products Company (supra), this Court, in Hotel Balaji (supra) observes:
“93. One of the arguments urged against the validity of the said provision was that
inasmuch as the tax is levied depending upon the mode in which the goods purchased
are consumed, disposed of or despatched, the tax is really one in the nature of
consumption tax or use tax, but not sales tax. This argument was answered by the
learned Judge in the following words:
“According to me, this contention is based on a misconception of the scope of
taxation on the sale of goods. It is true that sales tax is a tax imposed on the occasion
of the sale of goods. But it has no reference to the point of time at which the sale or
purchase takes place. It refers to the connection with the event of purchase or sale
and not the point of time at which such purchase or sale takes place. To read it
otherwise would render any retrospective imposition of sales tax invalid as in every
such case the tax would not be one which arises on the occasion of sale. By the same
logic, it would not be possible to tax any goods at the last purchase point in the State,
for the last purchase point in regard to any goods could be determined only when the
goods are sold later and not when the goods are purchased. On the same reasoning as
urged by counsel, one should say in such a case that since the goods are taxed only
when the goods are sold outside the State or are despatched for such sale outside the
State and so the last purchases are taxed not on the ‘occasion’ of the purchases and,
consequently, it is beyond the competence of the Legislature. That certainly cannot
be and that Supreme Court has held in the decision in State of Madras v.
Narayanaswami Naidu [(1968) 21 STC 1 (SC)] that the goods are taxable in such cases
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
21


in the financial year when they become the last purchases.”
94. The decision of Poti, J. was affirmed by a division bench of Kerala High Court in
Yusuf Shabeer v. State of Kerala [(1973) 32 STC 359 (Ker)]. Both these decisions were
expressly referred to and approved by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of
T.N. v. Kandaswami [(1975) 4 SCC 745] . Kandaswami [(1975) 4 SCC 745] was
concerned with the construction of Section 7-A of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax
Act which too levied a purchase tax and is couched in language similar to Section 5-A
of the Kerala Act. While dealing with the scheme of Section 7-A, this Court quoted
with approval certain passages from the judgment of Poti, J. including the following
sentence:
“If the goods are not available in the State for subsequent taxation by reason of one or
other of the circumstances mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 5-A(1) of
the Act then the purchaser is sought to be made liable under Section 5-A.”
95. This statement accords with our understanding of the scheme of Section 9 of
Haryana Act as set out hereinabove. To repeat, the scheme of Section 9 of Haryana
Act is to levy the tax on purchase of raw material and not to forego it where the goods
manufactured out of them are disposed of (or despatched, as the case may be) in a
manner not yielding any revenue to the State or serving the interests of nation and its
economy, as explained hereinbefore. The purchased goods are put an end to by their
consumption in manufacture of other goods and yet the manufactured goods are
dealt with in a manner as to deprive the State of any revenue; in such cases, there is
no reason why the State should forego its tax revenue on purchase of raw material.
96. Another observation in Kandaswami [(1975) 4 SCC 745] relevant for the present
purpose may also be noticed: (SCC p.
751, para 26) “It may be remembered that Section 7-A is at once a charging as well as a remedial
provision. Its main object is to plug leakage and prevent evasion of tax. In interpreting such a
provision, a construction which would defeat its purpose and, in effect, obliterate it from the statute
book, should be eschewed. If more than one construction is possible, that which preserves its
workability, and efficacy is to be preferred to the one which would render it otiose or sterile. The
view taken by the High Court is repugnant to this cardinal canon of interpretation.”
97. In the light of the above scheme of Section 9, it would not be right, in our respectful opinion, to
say that the tax is not upon the purchase of raw material but on the consignment of the
manufactured goods. It is well settled that taxing power can be utilised to encourage commerce and
industry. It can also be used to serve the interests of economy and promote social and economic
planning. Section 9 of Haryana Act and Section 13-AA of Bombay Act are intended to encourage the
industry and at the same time derive revenue. It is also not right to concentrate only on one
situation viz., consignment of goods to manufacturer's own depots (or to the depots of his agents)
outside the State. Disposal of goods within the State without effecting a sale also stands on the same
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
22


footing, an instance of which may be captive consumption of manufactured products in the
manufacture of yet other products. Once the scheme and policy of the provision is appreciated, there
is no room, in our respectful opinion, for saying that the tax is on the consignment of manufactured
goods.”
18. Ranganathan, J., in his concurring opinion, observed that he was delivering a separate judgment
since he had been a party to Goodyear (supra) and wished to explain his views. He acknowledged
the force of the argument of the States that the provisions in question only impose a tax on
purchases. He observed that it is designated as a purchase tax and levied on the turnover of such
purchases. Pertinent to us are his observations that the State may sometimes give up tax or specify
concessional rates of tax on sales based on some declarations or certificates, but the goods may be
taxed in the hands of the purchaser. It is emphasised that such a levy clearly falls within the
legislative competence of the State Legislature. The ambit of the power to levy tax in respect of the
sale or purchase of goods is very wide and would cover any tax having nexus with the sale or
purchase of goods, including attaching a levy to the last purchase in the State. This test,
Ranganathan, J. held, was a more appropriate one than the ambiguous standard of ‘taxable event’. A
tax on the sale or purchase of goods will not cease to be a tax simply because the determination of
the character as a ‘last purchase’ depends on certain subsequent events that may be spread over a
subsequent period of time.
19. In our opinion, the judgment in Hotel Balaji (supra) covers the issues in question. However,
Hotel Balaji (supra) did not consider and examine the judgment of the three-Judge Bench in
Mukerian Papers Ltd. v. State of Punjab,21 which followed the ratio of Goodyear (supra).
Interpreting the provisions of Section 4B of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, 22 Mukerian
Papers Ltd. (supra) held that one of the requirements for the accrual of purchase tax is that the
manufactured goods must be sent outside the State. The liability to pay purchase tax does not arise
at the time of purchasing raw materials within the State or their use in manufacturing goods other
than those listed in Schedule B. It was observed that, although the purchase tax is levied on the raw
materials purchased by the manufacturer, the actual levy is deferred 21 (1991) 2 SCC 580.
22 For short, “Punjab Act”.
until those materials are consumed in the manufacture of a commercially distinct commodity. The
relevant date, for the purpose of taxation, is the date on which the goods are sent outside the State.
Thus, the taxable event occurs when the goods are sent outside the State, regardless of when the raw
materials were purchased or converted into a new commodity. The Revenue relied on the decision in
Kandaswami (supra), contending that it was rendered in the context of a similar provision and thus
its ratio covers the case. Rejecting this argument, this Court in Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra),
observed that although Kandaswami (supra) was indeed rendered in relation to an analogous
provision, it had been distinguished in Goodyear (supra) on the ground that it did not address the
core that arose in the latter case. Notably, Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra), in paragraph 6, holds that
the Bench need not dilate on that issue further, as the correctness of Goodyear (supra) had not been
questioned before it.
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
23


20. Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra), Goodyear (supra), as well as the decision in Hotel Balaji (supra),
were considered by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Devi Dass Gopal Krishan Pvt. Ltd. and
Others v. State of Punjab and Others.23 The three-Judge Bench in Devi Dass (supra) comprised two
Judges – A.M. Ahmadi, J. (as his Lordship then was) and M.N. Venkatachaliah, CJI. – who were
also members of the Bench in Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra).24 In Devi Dass (supra), this Court
noticed that several state legislations— including those from Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West
Bengal, and Bombay— had been brought up for consideration in Hotel Balaji (supra). However, due
23 (1994) Supp 2 SCC 59.
24 A.M. Ahmadi, J., as his Lordship then was, was the author of the judgment in Mukerian Papers
Ltd. (supra).
to time constraints, only the cases relating to the Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, and Andhra Pradesh Acts
were taken up in Hotel Balaji (supra), segregating the cases concerning the other States. One of the
arguments raised in Devi Dass (supra) was that a conflict existed between Hotel Balaji (supra) and
Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra), the latter being said to squarely affirm the decision in Goodyear
(supra). A reference was sought to a larger Bench on this basis. Rejecting the contention, this Court
noted that the correctness of Goodyear (supra) had not been examined in Mukerian Papers Ltd.
(supra), a fact expressly recorded in Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra) and further addressed in
paragraph 101 in Hotel Balaji (supra). Moreover, Mukerian Papers Ltd. (supra) merely applied
Goodyear (supra) to the specific facts of the case; it neither affirmed nor dissented from the
reasoning in Goodyear (supra). Referring to the issue of the vires of the State enactments that were
struck down as unconstitutional in Goodyear (supra) on the grounds that they imposed a tax during
the course of inter-State trade or commerce amounting to a consignment tax, and also that the
taxable event was not purchase, specific reference was made to the reasoning of Ranganathan, J. in
Hotel Balaji (supra), which reads as under:
“3. (…)The learned Judge recalled his observations in his concurring opinion in
Goodyear and observed that the particular viewpoint presented in Hotel Balaji was
not presented in Goodyear and that on reconsideration, he finds the reasoning in
support of the validity of the provisions more persuasive. The learned Judge said:
(SCC pp. 549-50, para 10) “This larger concept, namely, that these various
alternatives are not set out in the section with a view to fasten the charge of tax at the
point of use, consumption, manufacture, production and consignment or despatch
but in an attempt to make clear that what is sought to be levied is a tax on raw
materials on the occasion of their last purchase inside the State had not been
projected before, or considered by us. I am inclined now to think that this is an
approach that basically alters the parameters and removes the provision from the
area of vulnerability.” (emphasis supplied)” This Court in Devi Dass (supra) affirmed
the reasoning in Hotel Balaji (supra), clearly holding that the decision in Goodyear
(supra) did not lay down the correct law:
“6. Now coming to the merits of the contention, we are of the considered opinion that
there is no reason to take a view different from the one taken in Hotel Balaji [1993
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
24


Supp (4) SCC 536 : (1993) 88 STC 98] . All the contentions urged now have been
considered and dealt with in the said decision. In our opinion, the approach adopted
in Goodyear [(1990) 2 SCC 71 : 1990 SCC (Tax) 223] does not accord with the
scheme, intendment and language of the relevant provisions of the Haryana and
Bombay Acts and cannot be accepted.”
21. Appropriate at this stage would be to refer to the order dated 27.10.2009 passed
in the present batch of appeals, wherein the two-Judge Bench referred the matter to a
larger Bench. After making a reference to Section 5A of the Kerala Act, this Court
distinguished ‘payability’ and ‘liability’ to observe:
“We have analyzed Section 5A of the Act. In our view, Section 5 is the charging
section. Under Section 5A, what is, inter alia, stated is that every dealer who, in the
course of his business purchases from a registered dealer or from any other person
any goods, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under this Act, in
circumstances in which no tax is payable under sub- sections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5)
of Section 5 and who either consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods
for sale or who uses or disposes of goods in any manner other than by way of sale in
the State or who despatches such goods to any place outside the State, except as a
direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall
pay tax on the taxable turnover relating to such purchase for the year at the rates
mentioned in Section 5.
If one carefully analyse Section 5A of the Act, it becomes clear that there is a clear
dichotomy between liability to tax [taxability] on the one hand and "payability" on
the other. The significance of Section 5A, prima facie, appears to be that if the State
has lost revenue/tax which otherwise it would have recovered had the purchase taken
place from a registered non-exempted dealer, then Section 5A enables the State to
recover such loss from the assessee herein. In such a case, Section 5A would stand
attracted, subject to the other conditions being fulfilled. This is where the difference
between "payability" and "leviability" comes into existence. The goods in question
were undoubtedly liable to tax. However, since exemption notification under Section
10 of the Act came into the field, though liable to tax, such goods were exempted from
payment of tax. In our view, therefore, there is a clear demarcation between these two
concepts of "leviability/taxability" on the one hand vis- a-vis "payability" on the
other. Our view is also fortified to this extent by the reasoning of the judgement of
this Court in the case of State of Tamil Nadu vs. M.K. Kandaswamy & Ors. reported in
[1975] 36 S.T.C. 191. In that case, a three-Judge Bench of this Court was required to
decide interpretation and scope of Section 7A of the Madras General Sales Tax Act,
1959 [for short, "Madras Act"], which section was in pari materia with Section 5A of
the Act. While interpreting Section 7A of the Madras Act, this Court observed that the
main object of Section 7A of the Madras Act is to plug leakage and prevent evasion of
tax. It further stated that, in interpretation of such a provision, a construction which
would defeat the purpose of the Act should be eschewed. It further observed that the
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
25


phraseology used in Section 7A of the Madras Act, though somewhat involved, is
fairly plain when it comes to giving meaning of the Section. The Court further
observed that the language of Section 7A of the Madras Act [which is akin to Section
5A of the Act] indicates the meaning of the word "taxability/liability" is to be read in
the context of the expression "taxable goods". If one reads the judgement, it clearly
indicates what we have said in the earlier paragraphs, namely, that the concept of
"taxability/leviability" is different and distinct from the concept of "payability". That
is why when the goods, which are otherwise liable to tax, are exempted by virtue of
notification from payability under Section 10 of the Act, Section 5A of the Act has
been enacted to levy tax on certain transactions on which otherwise the State loses its
revenue. This distinction has not been kept in mind in the decision of a two-Judge
Bench of this Court in the case of Peekay Re-rolling Mills (P) Ltd. vs. Assistant
Commissioner & Anr. reported in 2007 (4) S.C.C.30. In that judgement, it has been
held that the expression "levy" would include ‘collection’ or ‘payment’ as well and not
merely authorisation of the levy. With respect to our learned brothers, we do not
agree that the word ‘levy’ in the context of Section 5 and Section 5A of the Act would
include ‘collection’ or ‘payment’ of tax.
In the circumstances, on account of difference of opinion, we direct the Registry to
place the present batch of civil appeals before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India
for referring the matter to the larger Bench of this Court.”
22. A reading of the aforesaid quotation would reveal that the Division Bench clearly
agreed with the reasoning given in M.K.Kandaswami (supra) distinguishing
‘taxability’/‘liability’ and ‘payability’ as two different concepts in tax. The reference
order notes that the exemption granted under Section 10 of the Kerala Act does not
affect the taxability/liability, but only payability. Thus, where goods ordinarily
subject to tax are exempted from payment under Section 10 of the Act by virtue of a
notification, Section 5A has been enacted to nonetheless impose tax on certain
transactions, thereby safeguarding the State’s revenue from potential loss. The
reasoning and ratio in M.K.Kandaswami (supra) was expressly agreed as correct.
However, what prompted the two-Judge Bench to refer the matter to a larger Bench
was the decision of another two-Judge Bench of this Court in Peekay Re-Rolling Mills
(P) Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner and Another,25 which the Bench felt holds that
the expression ‘levy’ would include ‘collection’ or ‘payment’ as well and not mere
authorisation for levy. The two-Judge Bench in the reference order dated 27.10.2009
did not agree with the observation that the ‘levy’ would include ‘collection’ or
‘payment’ of tax in the context of Section 5 and 5A of the Act.
23. We have examined the judgment in Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra),
which refers to several decisions, including the judgments in Bhawani Cotton Mills
Ltd. v. State of Punjab and Another26 and Shanmuga Traders and Others v. State of
Tamil Nadu and Others.27 The Court in Peekay Re-
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
26


Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) holds that Sections 5 and 5A of the Kerala Act 25 (2007) 4 SCC 30.
26 (1967) 20 STC 290.
27 (1998) 5 SCC 349.
are distinct and independent, relying on the observations in M.K.Kandaswami (supra). The Court
quotes the finding that Section 7A of the Madras Act is a self-contained charging provision and
applies the same reasoning to uphold the validity of the levy under Section 5A of the Kerala Act.
24. However, the two-judge Bench in Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) states that the
observations in M.K. Kandaswami (supra) have no real bearing on the relevant issue, since M.K.
Kandaswami (supra) did not involve a question of tax on declared goods under Section 14 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 195628 and conditions laid down in this regard, particularly that of a single-
point levy. Since Section 15 of the Central Act mandates that tax on declared goods must be levied at
a single point, the Court held that once the goods are declared goods they cannot again be taxed
under Section 5A. That would amount to a second-stage levy, contrary to the scheme under Section
15 of the Central Act.
25. Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) then turns to the majority view in Bhawani Cotton Mills
(supra). In Bhawani Cotton Mills (supra) the majority judgment of the Constitution Bench authored
by Vaidialingam, J. had examined the question of levy of purchase tax on declared goods which are
goods of national importance included in Schedule C notified in terms of Section 14 of the Central
Act. Section 15 of the Central Act,29 as then 28 For short, “Central Act”.
29 “15. Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes or authorises·  the imposition of a
tax on the sale or purchase of declared goods, be subject to the following restrictions and conditions,
namely :-
(a) the tax payable under that law in respect of any sale or purchase of such goods
inside the State shall not exceed three per cent of the sale or purchase price thereof,
and such tax shall not be levied at more than one stage;
(b) where a tax has been levied under that Law in respect of the sale or purchase
inside the State of any declared goods and such goods are sold in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce, the tax applicable, had a stipulation that sales tax law
of a State, insofar as it imposes or authorizes levy of tax, shall be subject to the
conditions specified in Clauses
(a) and (b). Clause (a) in specific terms has stated that tax in respect of any sale or
purchase of declared goods inside the State shall not exceed 3% of the sale and
purchase price and secondly, the tax will not be levied at more than one stage. In the
said case, the levy of purchase tax on cotton was set aside on the grounds that the tax
imposed under the Punjab Act conflicted with Section 15 of the Central Act. The plea
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
27


of the assessee that sales tax may have been paid by the earlier transactions and
therefore the levy of purchase tax would violate clause (a) to Section 15 was accepted.
Pertinently, Bhawani Cotton Mills (supra) refers to the decision of this Court in A.V.
Fernandez v.
The State of Kerala,30 which refers to the following observations in Chatturam Horilram Limited v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa,31 to distinguish three stages in the imposition of
tax, namely, declaration of liability, assessment and recovery:
“If there is a liability to tax, imposed under the terms of the taxing statute, then
follow the provisions in regard to the assessment of such liability. If there is no
liability to tax there cannot be any assessment either. Sales or purchases in respect of
which there is no liability to tax imposed by the statute cannot at all be included in
the calculation of turnover for the purpose of assessment and the exact sum which
the dealer is liable to pay must be ascertained without any reference whatever to the
same.
There is a broad distinction between the provisions contained in the statute in regard
to the exemptions of tax or refund or rebate of tax on the one hand and in regard to
the non-liability to tax or non-imposition of tax on the other. In the former case, but
for the provisions as regards the exemptions or refund or rebate of tax, the sales or
purchases would have to be included in the gross turnover of the dealer because they
are prima facie liable to tax and the only thing which the dealer is entitled to in
respect thereof so levied shall be refunded to such person in such manner and subject
to such conditions as may be provided in any law in force in that State.” – as quoted
in Bhawani Cotton Mills (supra).
30 AIR 1957 SC 657.
31 AIR 1955 SC 619.
is the deduction from the gross turnover in order to arrive at the net turnover on which the tax can
be imposed. In the latter case, the sales or purchases are exempted from taxation altogether. The
Legislature cannot enact a law imposing or authorising the imposition of a tax thereupon as they are
not liable to any such imposition of tax. If they are thus not liable to tax, no tax can be levied or
imposed on them and they do not come within the pur- view of the Act at all. The very fact of their
nonliability to tax is sufficient to exclude them from the calculation of the gross turnover as well as
the net turnover on which sales tax can be levied or imposed.”
26. This reasoning in Bhawani Cotton Mills (supra) applies only where the exemption is
absolute—i.e., from both sale and purchase. It does not apply when the exemption is partial. If the
legislature exempts sales but taxes purchases, the tax on the purchaser remains valid. In such cases,
an exemption for one leg of the transaction does not imply exemption for the other. This
interpretation is supported by the language of Sections 5A and 7A of the Kerala and Tamil Nadu
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
28


Acts, which allow purchase tax even where no sales tax is imposed on the seller or the sale.
27. Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) also refers to Shanmuga Traders (supra), which had
been distinguished by the High Court in the impugned judgment. However, the Court was of the
opinion that in the impugned judgment the Division Bench of the High Court erroneously
distinguishes Shanmuga Traders (supra) from the facts of the case. Shanmuga Traders (supra) again
is a case relating to declared goods under Section 14 of the Central Act, which it was held can be
taxed only at a single point. It is for the State to determine whether the single point should be the
point of first sale, intermediate sale or the last sale in the State. If the State designates the point of
first sale as the single point of taxation and then exempts that point— whether through a general
provision or one specifically applicable to a particular class of sellers or goods—then tax cannot be
levied either at the first sale or at any subsequent stage. The ratio in the said case is not applicable as
this is not a case of declared goods and the bar under Section 15 of the Central Act does not apply.
28. Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) also relies on M/s Pine Chemicals Ltd. and Others v.
Assessing Authority and Others,32 which holds that exemption arises only when there is a tax
liability. The Court reaffirms that exemption presupposes that tax is otherwise leviable. This was
further affirmed in Associated Cement Companies Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Others,33 which
clarified that exemption is relevant only when there is liability. Thus, goods can be liable or exigible
to tax, but due to exemption, the obligation to pay may not arise.
29. Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) refers to Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Calcutta
Division v. National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd.,34 which makes a distinction between "levy" and
"assessment", holding that levy includes both imposition and assessment of tax but not collection.
This interpretation stems from Article 265 of the Constitution, which separately mentions levy and
collection. Cases like Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. and Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh35 and
Collector of Central Excise, Hyderabad and Others v. Vazir Sultan Tobacco Company Ltd.,
Hyderabad and Others36 are also cited, particularly with respect to excise duty under the Central
Excise and Salt Act, 1944. These cases explain that levy is on 32 (1992) 2 SCC 683.
33 (2004) 7 SCC 642.
34 (1972) 2 SCC 560.
35 (2001) 5 SCC 519.
36 (1996) 3 SCC 434.
manufacture, while collection is deferred to the stage of removal for administrative convenience,
and this did not affect the nature of the levy, which was on the manufacture of the goods. These
observations pertain to the levy of excise duty under the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944. It has
been consistently held that excise duty is levied on the event of manufacture or production of goods.
While the point of collection may be deferred until the goods are removed, the taxable event remains
manufacture. In our view, the decision in Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) does not support
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
29


the argument advanced by the assessees. The legal position is well established; the levy or incidence
of tax, and the payment of tax are distinct concepts. Goods may be liable or exigible to tax by virtue
of their nature or transaction, but when an exemption is granted, it only means that the payment of
tax is not required—though the liability in principle remains.
30. The confusion in Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) arises under the portion of the
judgment viz. “distinction between ‘levy’ and ‘collection’”. Peekay Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra)
refers to the following observations of this Court in National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd. (supra) :
“19. The term ‘levy’ appears to us to be wider in its import than the term ‘assessment’.
It may include both ‘imposition’ of a tax as well as ‘assessment’. The term ‘imposition’
is generally used for the levy of a tax or duty by legislative provisions indicating the
subject-matter of the tax and the rates at which it has to be taxed. The term
‘assessment’, on the other hand, is generally used in this country for the actual
procedure adopted in fixing the liability to pay a tax on account of particular goods or
property or whatever may be the object of the tax in a particular case and
determining its amount. The Division Bench appeared to equate ‘levy’ with an
‘assessment’ as well as with the collection of a tax when it held that ‘when the
payment of tax is enforced, there is a levy’. We think that, although the connotation of
the term ‘levy’ seems wider than that of ‘assessment’, which it includes, yet, it does
not seem to us to extend to ‘collection’. Article 265 of the Constitution makes a
distinction between ‘levy’ and ‘collection’.
(emphasis supplied)” In our opinion, the word ‘levy’ rightly refers to the exigibility or
imposition of tax.
The ‘assessment’ of tax is the second stage and refers to the determination of the tax
liability imposed by the levying/charging/imposition provisions. The ‘collection’ or
‘recovery’ of tax is the third aspect. Lastly, it must be remembered that Peekay
Re-Rolling Mills (P) Ltd. (supra) is also a case of declared goods.
CONCLUSION
31. In view of the aforesaid discussion and applying the ratio in terms thereof, we must reject the
argument on behalf of the assessee that Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act and Section 5A of the
Kerala Act will have no application when tax is exempt at the hands of the seller, or for that matter,
the tax under Section 3 or Section 5 of the aforesaid Act at the hands of the seller is payable at the
point of first sale. Sections 5A or 7A, as the case may be, impose purchase tax specifically in
situations where the seller is granted exemption from payment of tax. The legal position is that
exemption from payment of tax at the time of sale is a pre-condition for attracting Sections 5A and
7A respectively. Further, the fact that in case the goods were not exempt from payment of tax at the
time of sale and the goods would have attracted tax at the first point of sale, is immaterial and
inconsequential. Levy of purchase tax is governed by the provisions and stipulations of Sections 5A
or 7A. They are independent and in a way constitute charging sections. Purchase tax is leviable on
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
30


and payable by the purchaser. However, the legislations do not levy the purchase tax to tax the
transaction of the sale and purchase twice. Instead, it levies purchase tax only where no sales tax
was payable on the sale. Further, purchase tax has not been made leviable in all situations, except in
three situations, namely, (a) where the goods on which no tax is paid were used in manufacture; or
(b) where the goods were despatched out of the State other than by way of inter- State trade or
commerce; or (c) where the goods are disposed of in a manner other than sale within the State.
However, the need to satisfy the conditions do not change the nature of the charge, which is, tax on
purchase. These aspects and the constitutionality has been explained in Hotel Balaji (supra) and
Devi Dass (supra) referred to above.
32. The challenge to the constitutional validity must be rejected on the basis of the ratio elucidated
by this Court in Kandaswami (supra), Hotel Balaji (supra) and Devi Dass (supra). The contention of
the appellant-assessees that the constitutional validity of the impugned provisions was not
examined while deciding Kandaswami (supra) ought to be rejected, even if we would accept that the
question of constitutional validity was not directly addressed. Hotel Balaji (supra) specifically
upholds the constitutionality of the impugned provisions, disagreeing with the opinion/ratio
expressed in Goodyear (supra). We would also like to record that purchase tax is levied on the
purchase of goods on which no tax has been paid on account of any exemption as a result of which
the seller is not required to collect and pay sales tax. The decision whether or not to levy purchase
tax is a prerogative and power of the State Legislature. As noticed above, the liability to pay is
distinct from levy of tax. This being so, the argument that purchase tax is leviable when there is
cross- border or inter-State movement of the goods or is a consignment tax must be rejected. Even
otherwise, the event, that is inter-State movement of the goods, which does not amount to
inter-State sale, falls within the legislative domain and power of the State Legislature. The State,
when it imposes such tax, does not exceed its power to impose tax conferred by the State List as
inter-State sale of goods is not being subjected to tax. The rationale explaining the validity have been
elucidated in both Hotel Balaji (supra) and Devi Dass (supra).
33. While examining tax provisions, we must give sufficient latitude to the Legislature. Income
generation in the form of taxes is an important source of revenue for both the State and the Central
governments. Some play in the joints should be given to the Legislature while dealing with laws
relating to taxation and economic activities except in case of encroachment upon the power to tax
that is not vested with them in terms of the Union or the State List, etc.37
34. Realising the above legal position, a different set of arguments was raised in Civil Appeal Nos.
3024-3025 of 2012 filed by M/s Britannia Industries Limited. According to us, the arguments do not
have any merit and must be rejected. We would briefly refer to the said arguments and our reasons
for rejecting them.
35. It is submitted that in terms of Section 17 of the Tamil Nadu Act, sales of vegetable oil by the
dealers up to a particular turnover was granted exemption from payment of tax.38 This, in our
opinion, supports the case of the Revenue for what is granted is exemption from payment of sales
tax and not the 37 See Chief Commissioner of Central Goods and Service Tax and Others v. Safari
Retreats (P) Ltd. and Others, (2025) 2 SCC 523; Elel Hotels and Investments Limited and Others v.
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
31


Union of India, (1989) 3 SCC 698; Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India, Etc. v.
Union of India and Others, (1989) 3 SCC 634.
38 As per Government Order dated 27.03.1998, as amended by Government Order dated
02.06.2000. purchase tax. Thereafter, reference is made to sub-sections (1), (2) and (2A) of Section
8 of the Central Act. In particular, with reference to explanation to Section 8(2A) of the Central Act,
it is submitted that the benefit of the said sub- section is not available as the Government Order39
granting exemption had specified circumstances or conditions for grant of exemption. This, it is
submitted, is to ensure that the exemption is available only to intra-State sales and not inter-State
sales. This argument also supports the case of Revenue. The contention that purchase tax payable
under Section 7A at the rates mentioned under Sections 3 and 4 should be treated as exempt in view
of the GO issued under Section 17, as stated above, is untenable. The GO refers to the tax payable at
the time of sale, that is, the sales tax. The GO does not grant exemption from payment of purchase
tax. The grant of exemption being for the purpose of payment of sales tax, it does not follow that
purchase tax would not be payable when conditions of Section 7A are satisfied. Further, it would be
contradictory or rather nugatory to argue that the rate of tax specified in the Schedule should be
taken as nil as no payment is to be made on the sale amount as sales tax. If we accept this argument,
it would defeat the very purpose and objective of enacting Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act. Section
7A is only attracted where the sales tax is not payable, which means there should be an exemption
notification under Section 17 or exemption under the Third Schedule, read with Section 8 of the
Tamil Nadu Act.
36. In view of the aforesaid reasoning, the judgments of this Court in Kailash Nath and Another v.
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others40 and Collector of 39 For short, “G.O.” 40 AIR 1957 SC 790.
Central Excise, Bombay-I and Another v. Parle Exports Pvt. Ltd.41 will have no application. The
reason as noted above is simple: the exemption notification pertains solely to tax on sales and does
not extend to purchase tax, which becomes payable only when sales tax is exempt.
37. In view of the above, we also reject the argument that the applicable rate of tax on purchase
would be nil as the tax payable on the sale in view of the exemption from payment of sales tax is nil.
Reliance placed on Casio India Company Private Limited v. State of Haryana42 is misplaced and
liable to be rejected as Casio India (supra) deals with the issue of payment of tax under the Central
Act and not with the provisions we are concerned. The ratio of the said case cannot be applied in
view of the direct judgments of this Court in Kandaswami (supra), Hotel Balaji (supra) and Devi
Dass (supra).
38. The argument that the rate applicable under Section 7A would be the effective rate and not the
rate mentioned in the Schedule must be rejected for the reasons set out above. The exemption in the
present case relates only to payment of sales tax and not purchase tax. For the same reason, we
would reject the argument relying upon the judgment in the case of Rajputana Agencies Ltd. v.
CIT43 and Thermax Private Limited v. Collector of Customs (Bombay).44 These decisions again are
directly not applicable to the legislations in question but relate to the rate of tax applicable in case of
dividend tax or the levy of additional duty under the Central Excise Rules, 1944 with reference to the
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
32


provisions of the relevant enactments and the rules 41 AIR 1989 SC 644.
42 (2016) 6 SCC 209.
43 (1959) 35 ITR 168.
44 (1992) 4 SCC 440.
thereunder. It must be remembered that excise duty and customs duty are payable by the importer
or the manufacturer. There is no reverse levy in the case of customs duty or the excise duty in terms
of the two enactments. Purchase tax can be levied and payable, even the sales tax is not payable.
39. Accordingly, question nos. I and II are answered in affirmative, that is, in favour of the Revenue
and against the appellant-assessees in terms of the aforesaid reasoning and decision. Question No.
III is answered in negative in favour of the State and against the appellant-assessees by upholding
the constitutional validity of Section 5A of the Kerala Act and Section 7A of the Tamil Nadu Act. The
reference is answered accordingly. All the appeals preferred by the appellant-assessees are
dismissed and the judgments/orders of the High Court of Kerala and the High Court of Judicature
at Madras are upheld.
40. The stay order(s) shall stand vacated.
41. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
42. There shall be no order as to costs.
......................................CJI.
(SANJIV KHANNA) …......................................J. (SANJAY KUMAR) …......................................J. (R.
MAHADEVAN) NEW DELHI;
MAY 09, 2025.
C.T. Kochouseph vs The State Of Kerala And Anr. Etc on 9 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151547876/
33
