M/S Shri Sendhuragro And Oil Industries vs Kotak Mahindra
Bank Ltd on 6 March, 2025
2025 INSC 328
(CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)
TRANSFER PETITION (CRL.) NO. 608 OF 2024
M/s Shri Sendhur Agro & Oil Industries ……..Petitione
Versus
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. ……..Respondent(
WITH
T.P.(CRL) NO. 670 OF 2024
T.P.(CRL) NO. 761 OF 2024
T.P.(CRL) NO. 662 OF 2024
T.P.(CRL) NO. 977 OF 2024
T.P.(CRL) NO. 850 OF 2024
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.03.06
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
1. Since the issues raised in all the captioned transfer petitions are the same, those
were taken up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common
judgment and order.
2. For the sake of convenience, the Transfer Petition (Criminal) No. 608 of 2024 is
treated as the lead matter.
3. This transfer petition filed under Section 406 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short, “the Cr.P.C.”) is at the instance of a proprietary concern through its
proprietor with a prayer to transfer Criminal Case No. 4016 of 2021 titled as Kotak
Mahindra Bank Limited v. M/s Shri Sendhur Agro and Oil Industries pending in the
court of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Chandigarh (UT) to the court of Metropolitan
Magistrate, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, essentially on the ground that no cause of
action could be said to have arose for the bank to lodge the complaint for the offence
punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (for short, the
N.I. Act) in Chandigarh.
4. In the memorandum of the transfer petition the following has been pleaded:
“That the Petitioner herein seeks the transfer to Metropolitan Magistrate Court,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu on the following grounds:
(a) Because in the facts and circumstance of the present case, the transaction between
the Petitioner and the Respondent wholly happened in Coimbatore and the Courts in
Coimbatore alone will have the jurisdiction to entertain the present criminal
complaint. The Petitioner holds a savings Account in the Respondent's Coimbatore
Branch and the loan was also processed in the same branch. All the previous EMI
were also deducted from her Bank Account in Coimbatore and credited to the loan
account maintained in the Coimbatore Branch.
Therefore, the Court in Chandigarh will have no jurisdiction to entertain the present Criminal
Complaint.
(b)Because in the facts and circumstances of the Instant/case, under Sec. 142 of the Act the Court
within whose jurisdiction the Bank where the Cheque, is presented for collection or where the
Cheque is presented for payment alone has the Jurisdiction to entertain the complaint under
Sec.138 of the Act. Whereas the present Complaint does not satisfy any of the conditions under the
Sec.142.
(c) Because in the facts and circumstances of the present case, there are already pending
proceedings between the Petitioner and the Respondent in Coimbatore and the Respondent has
purposefully filed the present proceedings in Ahmedabad only to harass the Petitioner with multiple
proceedings in different States.
(d)Because in the facts and circumstances of the instant case the · Court in Chandigarh had no
jurisdiction to entertain the criminal complaint as the Respondent's headquarters in Mumbai and
it's the branch office in Coimbatore had solely processed the loan of the Petitioner. Hence the Court
in Chandigarh where no cause of action arose will not have the jurisdiction to entertain the present
proceedings.
(e) Because in the facts and circumstances of the instant case, the Petitioner had opted to repay the
EMI through automatic deduction facility and the same gets credited automatically into the loan
account maintained by the Branch office in Chennai. The automatic deduction for the EMI is not
branch specific. Therefore, the same does not satisfy the conditions under Sec. 142 for filing the
complaint under Sec. 138 of the Act in Ahmedabad.
(f) Because in the present circumstances the present proceedings are initiated solely with an intent
to harass the Petitioner to travel all the way to Chandigarh from Kangeyum only to attend the court
proceedings. The Petitioner has been harassed by the Respondent for over 5 years by using
anti-social elements therefore the Petitioner fears his safety to travel alone to Chandigarh to attend
the proceedings.
(g) Because in the facts and circumstances of the instant case, the Petitioner doesn't Know anyone in
Chandigarh and does not even know the local language to effectively defend himself in the criminal
proceedings initiated by the Respondent.
(h) Because in the facts and circumstances of the instant case, the Respondent Bank has already
initiated Sarfaesi proceedings for the recovery of entire loan amount. The Respondent and its
employees have colluded and sold the properties of the Petitioner without any information. The
Petitioner has already filed appropriate proceedings against the Respondent in Coimbatore. In the
said circumstances, the Criminal Complaint under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act is
abuse of process of law.” ORDER PASSED BY THIS COURT
5. On 22nd July 2024, this Court passed the following order:
“Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner concern is engaged in the business of producing coconut oil, selling
coconut oil and its byproducts and is situated at Coimbatore; that the petitioner
availed over-draft limits and terms from the respondent-Bank at its R.S. Puram
branch at Coimbatore; that a loan was granted against the equitable mortgage of
properties located at Coimbatore and the money was also disbursed at Coimbatore.
The learned senior counsel submits that only for the presentation of the cheque the
Bank has proceeded to Chandigarh. Issue notice, returnable in four weeks. In the
meantime, there shall be stay of further proceedings in Complaint Case No.4016 of
2021 titled as “Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. Vs. M/s. Shri Sendhur Agro and Oil
Industries”, pending in the Court of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, UT, Chandigarh.”
6. Thereafter, on 29th November 2024, the following order was passed:
“1. The learned counsel appearing for the Respondent - Bank prays for a short
adjournment to seek appropriate instructions in the matters.
2. Prima facie, it appears that the entire transaction had taken place in Coimbatore,
State of Tamil Nadu. However, the Bank seems to have filed complaints under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 in Chandigarh.
3. The bank owes an explanation why it thought fit to file complaints in Chandigarh
and not in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu.
4. Post these matters on 6-12-2024.” WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
THE PETITIONER:
7. The written submissions of the petitioner read as under:
“A. The scope of powers under Section 406 CrPC, 1973 (akin to Section 527 of CrPC,
1898 and Section 447 of BNSS, 2024) is the question which concerns this Hon'ble
Court.
B. One aspect of exercise of power of transfer is the introduction of Section 142A in the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 by Amending Act 26 of 2015, which has retrospective effect. Clause (2) of
Section 142A contemplates a situation where cases against the same drawer ought to be filed in the
same Court where the first case pertaining to dishonor of cheque is filed or "transferred".
Independent of the fact that the interpretation of this provision is being considered by this Hon'ble
Court in Kedar Bhausaheb Malhari vs. Axis Bank Ltd. [TP (Crl.) 33 of 2018] where the Court has
impleaded the Union of India, taken assistance of an amicus curie and also requested the Ld.
Attorney General to appear, the Petitioner submits that in certain scenarios, power of transfer under
Section 406 CrPC should be exercised to transfer Section 138 Negotiable Instruments Act cases.
C. The Petitioner submits that the invocation of power of transfer presupposes the existence of
jurisdiction. A case which is filed in a court without jurisdiction should be subjected to a quashing
petition and therefore as a matter of principle, the power of transfer under Section 406 CrPC is not
sought on the ground that the court from which transfer is sought does not have jurisdiction. The
expression which is used in all the three codes is "expedient for the ends of justice" and it is this
expression alone which is sought to be invoked by the Petitioner.
D. The undisputed facts from Transfer Petition (Crl.) No. 608 of 2024 may kindly be noticed. Some
of these facts are recorded in the order issuing notice dated 22.07.2024 –
(a) The Petitioner is a proprietorship concern which deals with production and distribution of
coconut oil and its by- products.
(b) The Petitioner firm had taken overdraft facility from the Respondent Bank vide sanction letter
dated 19.03.2015 (pg. 6 of Crl. MP No. 155078 of 2024). This was extended till 2078. The Bank's
correspondence address was recorded therein as Egmore, Chennai branch and had nothing to do
with Chandigarh.
(c) For this overdraft facility, several collaterals in the form of land were taken apart from a lien
which was created on a Fixed Deposit of Rs. 25 lakhs. The 11 properties which were taken as
collateral are all lands located in the area of Kangeyam in Tiruppur district (bifurcated from the
erstwhile Coimbatore district) of Tamil Nadu.
(d) The sanction letter also required the Petitioner borrower to repay from his HDFC Bank account
situated in the Kangeyam branch.
(e) It is pleaded by the Petitioner at pg 3 that all procedures for availing the overdraft facility were
done in the Coimbatore branch.
(f) It is further pleaded that the blank cheques of Kotak Mahindra Bank, Tiruppur were given as
surety and all the EMI's were to be made through ECS facility.
(g) The Petitioner has also pleaded that there are no other transactions that the Petitioner has with
any other branch of the Respondent Bank.
(h) The Petitioner defaulted on payments of its EMIs in the year 2018 which resulted in a demand
notice under the SARFAESI Act for a sum of Rs. 2.74 crores. The consequential sale notices and the
sale of the Petitioner's assets also took place in Coimbatore.
(i) The Respondent vide. Its letter dated 05.10.2018 had also informed the Petitioner that his
Account would be declared as NPA in next two days.
(j) The Petitioner challenged the SARFAESI proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal at
Coimbatore (Annexure P-2, pg. 28 onwards).
E. Despite all these aforesaid transactions taking place within the jurisdiction of Tamil Nadu, the
Respondent Bank chose to present the cheque for Rs. 21 lakhs at Chandigarh. The complaint is
annexed at Annexure P-1 (pg. 13 onwards) and shows the address of the Petitioner to be in Tamil
Nadu. The complaint does not refer to several of the aforementioned undisputed facts. This
complaint is dated 21.04.2021 and is numbered as CIS No. NACT/4016/2021, while the summons
on this have been issued by the Court of Ld. CJM, Chandigarh only on 30.04.2024. This factor of
issuance of summons after 3 years of delay also indicates that the complaint was filed and kept in
the Registry only to be used at the whim of the Respondent Bank.
F. In the aforesaid background, the Petitioner is requesting this Court to exercise its power of
transfer on the anvil of "expedient for the ends of justice". The following parameters and precedents
may be considered – i. This Hon'ble Court on 29.11.2024 had called upon the Respondent Bank to
explain the reason for choosing the jurisdiction of Chandigarh even though the entire transaction
had taken place in Coimbatore. There is, however, no explanation that has been given till date. The
only response in the Counter Affidavit filed is in paragraph 5 which records that the Bank's
collection account is located in Chandigarh. This stand of the Bank might justify the existence of
jurisdiction at Chandigarh but does not answer/explain the reason for filing a complaint there,
especially when one set of legal proceedings viz. under SARFAESI Act were undertaken within the
jurisdiction of Tamil Nadu.
ii. As submitted earlier, this is not an issue pertaining to territorial jurisdiction or an issue of
convenience of the accused, but having undertaken all the proceedings including initiation of one set
of litigation within Tamil Nadu, it is unjust for the Respondent Bank to choose an unrelated
jurisdiction merely because it has an option of more than one places where a complaint can be
lodged.
iii. The parameters of 'expedient for the ends of justice’ should take into account a situation where
availability of more than one jurisdiction is misused for no extra benefit to the Complainant.
iv. The legislative intent of Section 142A also contemplates that holder in due course is not allowed
to misuse the availability of multiple jurisdictions and therefore have consciously used the
expression 'transfer' along with 'filed' in Section 142A(2).
v. This Hon’ble Court recently in Navapavithra G & Ors. vs. M/s Cholamandalam Investment &
Finance Co. Ltd. [TP (Crl] No.441 of 2024] in its order dated 24.10.2024 had held that financial
institutions should avoid filing proceedings in various states merely because they have offices there,
and should file proceedings in courts having jurisdiction where the actual transaction has taken
place and where the cause of action has arisen vi. Further, this Hon'ble Court in M/s Oasis Marine
Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. vs. M/s Godrej Agrovet Ltd. [TP (Crl.) No. 323-325 of 2023] in order dated
08.11.2024 and in Blue Line Entertainment Media Ltd. vs. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. [TP (Crl.) No.
224 of 2020] in order dated 31.10.2022 has allowed similar petitions where the Respondent had
instituted other recovery proceedings in a different jurisdiction. The Petitioner submits that they are
identically situated.
vii. Moreover, this Hon’ble Court in several cases has allowed transfer petitions when multiple
Section 138 NI Act complaint cases are pending against a drawer in different locations. For instance,
in Sri Lakshmi Agencies v. Rallis India Ltd., (2006) 13 SCC 312, transfer petition was allowed
considering the convenience of the parties and the fact that the Respondent company was a
multinational company with offices all over India. Some other similar cases are A.E. Premanand v.
Escorts Finance Ltd., (2004) 13 SCC 527; Global Infrastructure & Technologies Ltd. v. G.K. Builders,
(2005) 12 SCC 427; Vikram Tractors v. Escorts Ltd., (2005) 10 SCC 80; Videocon International Ltd.
v. Sujana Corpn. Ltd., (2005) 13 SCC 125.
The Petitioner submits that the same principle is applicable here, since two separate prosecutions
relating to the same transaction are being undertaken in different jurisdictions against him.
viii. In BR Gupta & Anr. vs. Rohit Jain, (2007) 7 SCC 454, this Hon'ble Court exercised its power
under Section 406 CrPC since the Petitioner therein was being subjected to a Section 138 NI Act
complaint case as well as an FIR for cheating and forgery relating to the same transaction, in two
different jurisdictions.
ix. A 3-judge bench of this Hon'ble Court in Harman Electronics (P) Ltd. v. National Panasonic
India (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 720, para 21 had also noted that - "We cannot, as things stand today, be
oblivious of the fact that a banking institution holding several cheques signed by the same borrower
can not only present the cheque for its encashment at four different places but also may serve
notices from four different places so as to enable it to file four complaint cases at four different
places. This only causes grave harassment to the accused. It is, therefore, necessary in a case of this
nature to strike a balance between the right of the complainant and the right of an accused vis-a-vis
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure."
x. For interpreting the phrase "expedient for the ends of justice", it is worthwhile to mention this
Hon'ble Court's interpretation of the phrase "justice, equality and good conscience”. In M. Siddiq
(Ram Janambhumi Temple-5 J.) v. Suresh Das, (2020) 1 SCC 1, this Hon'ble Court traced the
origins of the phrase in Roman law. Paragraphs 1000 - 1022 deal with the origin of this phrase and
broadly refers to a situation where adherence to written law leads to "Unjust Outcome" (Paragraph
1001). It is this principle, in most humble submission of the Petitioner, which ought to be the basis
for Section 406 Petitions.
xi. The other factors which this Hon'ble Court has considered towards ends of justice is not the
convenience of the accused but the convenience of possible witnesses, the cost to be incurred by
both the prosecution and the defence witness to travel a long way, the language in which the
proceedings will be undertaken, etc. G. The following set of judgments may be considered in
addition to the abovementionedi. The proposition that the power under Section 406 would not be ever used for the convenience of
the accused is too broad and defeats the expression in Section 406, i.e. 'expedient for the ends of
justice'. This proposition has been used in cases where this Hon'ble Court has held that it is not the
convenience of a single accused, rather the convenience of the other accused (if any), the witnesses,
the prosecution and the larger interest of the society needs to be cumulatively seen - held in Abdul
Nazar Madani vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr., (2000) 6 SCC 204, para 7 - followed in Nahar Singh
Yadau vs. Union of India, (2011) 1 SCC 307; Mrudul M Damle & Anr. s. CBI, (2012) 5 SCC 706;
Harita Sunil Parab vs. State of NCT of Delhi, (2018) 6 SCC 358. In Sri Jayendra Saraswathy vs. State
of TN & Ors, (2005) 8 SCC 771, para 25, apart from the above consideration of convenience, this
Hon'ble Court also took into account the language in which the proceedings will take place, and the
witnesses will testify in before allowing the transfer petition.
ii. There are judgments on Section 138 NI Act in which Transfer Petitions have been dismissed, like
Kaushik Chatterjee Vs. State of Haryana. & Ors., (2020) 10 SCC 99. However, these are cases where
the respective Petitioners argued the issue of territorial jurisdiction.
iii. This Hon'ble Court has dealt with various stages of development of law of jurisdiction under NI
Act in Yogesh Upadhyay & Anr. as. Atlanta Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 170, paras 5-13. This is cited
to indicate a recent decision on how general jurisdiction under Section 138 NI Act has been viewed
by this Hon'ble Court.”
8. In such circumstances referred to above the petitioner prayed that there being merit in his
transfer petition the same may be allowed and the proceedings be transferred from the UT of
Chandigarh to the State of Tamil Nadu.
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
RESPONDENT BANK:
9. The written submissions filed by the respondent Bank read as under:
“A. It is submitted that the Respondent is Banking company within the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949. On the basis of representations made by the petitioner, the
respondent extended credit facilities to the petitioner and its group companies. The
petitioners however defaulted on repayments and as of July 2022, owed a sum of
more than Rs. 34.14 Cr. to the Respondent.
B. The Respondent Bank filed a Complaint under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instrument Act (hereinafter referred to as ‘the said Act’) in accordance with law
before the competent court within whose jurisdiction the branch of the bank where
the payee maintains the account is situated. In this regard it is submitted the Cheque
was presented at Respondent’s Chandigarh Branch for the reason that the
routing/collection account in respect of the subject cheque (in a NPA account) was
located at Chandigarh.
C. Significantly, the petitioner has in its written submissions clarified that it is not
disputing the jurisdiction of the court where the complaint was filed. In fact, it is the
petitioner’s contention that the filing of the transfer petitions (as opposed to a
quashing petition) pre-supposes the existence of jurisdiction of the court from where
the proceedings are sought to be transferred.
D. Section 142 A of the Negotiable Instrument Act stipulates the conditions when the
Complaint filed under Section 138 may be transferred. The object of the provision is
that all the complaint cases arising out of one transaction should be tried at one
place. In the present cases as well as the connected cases, the Respondent has filed
cases at Chandigarh only; thus, no ground under Section 142 A to seek transfer
arises.
E. The transfer petitions are not supported by any sufficient grounds It is most
respectfully submitted that the Petitioner has sought transfer only on the general
grounds viz the distance and the difference in language. The Petitioner has not
pleaded (i) any specific problem or health issue which would make it difficult for him
to attend the proceedings at Chandigarh (ii)any miscarriage of justice that may
happen if the proceedings are continued at Chandigarh (iii) difficulty in
understanding English language which is uniformly used in all the courts. It is most
respectfully submitted that powers under Section 406 of the CrPC to transfer cases
may be exercised only when such transfer is expedient for the ends of justice. This
Hon’ble Court has consistently held that the powers under Section 406 of the CrPC
are discretionary powers and ought to be used sparingly. In Bhiaru Ram Vs. CBI
(Transfer Petition (Crl.) No. 37 of 2009) (judgment and order dated 3.8.2010), this
Hon’ble Court observed that “that for the ends of justice, this Court can transfer any
criminal case or appeal to any place. In order to transfer a case from one State to
another or from one place to another, there must be “reasonable apprehension” on
the part of the party to a case that justice may not be done. Mere allegation that there
is apprehension that justice will not be done, cannot be the basis of transfer.” It is
humbly submitted that the petitioner has failed to make-out a case which would
warrant exercise of powers by this Hon’ble Court under Section 406 of the Cr.P.C.
F. It is submitted that the Virtual Facility is available in courts in Chandigarh and the
option to attend the hearing virtually is always available to the Petitioner. Instead of
approaching Trial Court and moving an application for exemption therein and
satisfying the Trial Court regarding the necessity of such exemption, the Petitioner
has directly approached this Hon’ble Court.
G. It is submitted that the cheque bouncing cases filed by the respondent in
Chandigarh were prior in time to the original application filed before the DRT,
Coimbatore.
H. It is further submitted that there are a batch of cases pending in Chandigarh. The
Respondent has filed all cases arising out of the transaction at one single place viz
Chandigarh. Thus, no inconvenience could have been caused to the Petitioner.
I. It is further submitted that there are various cases pending at Chandigarh District
Court arising out the same transaction in which no Transfer Petition has been filed. It
is submitted that there are 23 cases pending in Chandigarh out of which the transfer
petition has been filed by the petitioner only in the present batch of cases and in two
more cases. To the best of knowledge of the respondent, no other transfer petition
has been filed in the other connected cases. A list of the cases pending in Chandigarh
court are annexed herewith and marked as Annexure -A (Page No. 6 to 7).
J. It is submitted that transfer of some of the cases arising out of the transaction
would be contrary to the object of the Amendment Act of 2015 and in particular
Section 142A (2) & (3) inserted vide the said amendment.
K. The Respondent seek to put forth the following heads of submissions alongwith citations in
support thereof:-
(a) Complaint case Under Section 138 of the NI Act cannot be transferred at the
convenience of the accused
(i) S. Nalini Jayanthi vs M. Ramasubba Reddy, TP (Crl) 655/2022 (Paragraph 2)
(ii) Kasthuripandian S Vs RBL Bank Limited, TP (Crl) No.515/2024 (Paragraph 1)
(b) Under Section 142 (2) (a) of the NI Act, the court within whose jurisdiction the
branch of the bank where the payee maintains the account is situated, will have
jurisdiction to try the offence. The ground that when head office was in Siliguri, the
complaint has been filed in Agra to harass the Petitioner, was held, in the facts of that
case, not to be sufficient ground to seek transfer.
(i) Himalaya Self Farming Group & Ant vs M/s Goyal Feed Suppliers, TP (Crl)
273/2020 (Paragraph 5)
(c) Mere language factor/convenience of a party is not enough ground to seek
transfer.
(i) Rajkumar Sabu vs Sabu vs Sabu trade private limited, 2021 SCC Online SC 378
(Paragraph 8-10)
(d) Mere convenience of a party is not enough. The apprehension must be
reasonable.
(i) Bhiaru Ram & Ors. vs CBI & Anr., (2010) 7 SCC 799 (Paragraph 9 to 15)
(e) Jurisdiction under the Section 406 of the CrPC ought to be sparingly used.
(i) Nahar Singh Yadav vs UOI & Ors, (2011) 1 SCC 307 (Paragraph 29)”
10. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel appearing for the Bank prayed that
there being no merit in the transfer petition, the same may be rejected.
ANALYSIS
11. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record the following questions fall for our consideration.
i. Whether a complaint filed under Section 138 of the N.I. Act can be ordered to be transferred from
one court to the other in exercise of powers under Section 406 of the Cr.P.C. on the ground of lack of
territorial jurisdiction of the court in which the complaint is filed?
ii. Assuming that the court in which the complaint filed under Section 138 of the N.I. Act lacks
territorial jurisdiction to try the same, then is it permissible for this court in exercise of powers
under Section 406 of the Cr.P.C. to transfer the said complaint to the court having territorial
jurisdiction to try the offence? iii. Whether the expression “that for the ends of justice, this Court can
transfer any criminal case or appeal to any place.” in Section 406 Cr.P.C. embraces in itself the lack
of territorial jurisdiction of the court to try the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act?
12. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we must look into a few
relevant provisions of the N.I. Act. Section 138 of the N.I. Act reads thus:
“138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.— Where
any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for
payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank
unpaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of that account
is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid
from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be
deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other
provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be
extended to two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the
cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless—
(a)the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the
date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b)the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a
demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to
the drawer of the cheque, [within thirty days of the receipt of information by him
from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c)the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money
to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.”
13. What is relevant for our purpose is Section 142 of the N.I. Act. Section 142 relates to the
cognizance of offences. Section 142 reads thus:
“142. Cognizance of offences.— (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)—
(a)no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 138 except
upon a complaint, in writing, made by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in
due course of the cheque;
(b)such complaint is made within one month of the date on which the cause of action
arises under clause (c) of the proviso to section 138: Provided that the cognizance of a
complaint may be taken by the Court after the prescribed period, if the complainant
satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not making a complaint within
such period.
(c)no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class shall try any offence punishable under section 138.
(2) The offence under section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a court
within whose local jurisdiction, —
(a)if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank
where the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is
situated; or
(b)if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or holder in due course,
otherwise through an account, the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer
maintains the account, is situated.”
14. Section 142-A of the N.I. Act provides for validation for transfer of pending cases. Section 142-A
reads thus:
“Validation for transfer of pending cases.— (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any judgment, decree, order or direction of
any court, all cases transferred to the court having jurisdiction under sub-section (2)
of section 142, as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance,
2015, shall be deemed to have been transferred under this Act, as if that sub-section
had been in force at all material times.
(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 142 or
sub-section (1), where the payee or the holder in due course, as the case may be, has
filed a complaint against the drawer of a cheque in the court having jurisdiction
under sub-section (2) of section 142 or the case has been transferred to that court
under sub-section (1) and such complaint is pending in that court, all subsequent
complaints arising out of section 138 against the same drawer shall be filed before the
same court irrespective of whether those cheques were delivered for collection or
presented for payment with.
(3)If, on the date of the commencement of the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Act, 2015, more than one prosecution filed by the same payee or holder in due course,
as the case may be, against the same drawer of cheques is pending before different
courts, upon the said fact having been brought to the notice of the court, such court
shall transfer the case to the court having jurisdiction under subsection (2) of section 142, as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance,
2015, before which the first case was filed and is pending, as if that sub-section had been in force at
all material times.”
15. This court in the case of Yogesh Upadhaya and Another v. Atlanta Limited reported in 2023 SCC
OnLine SC 170 had the occasion to consider the plea for transfer filed under Section 406 Cr.P.C. in
connection with six complaint cases filed under Section 138 and 142 of the N.I. Act respectively.
While considering the plea for transfer, the court had the opportunity to consider Section 142(2)
contained in the statute book along with Section 142-A.
16. The relevant observations in Yogesh Upadhaya (Supra) read as thus:
“ 6. In K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan [(1999) 7 SCC 510], this Court held
that an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 has five components : (1) drawing
of the cheque, (2) presentation of the cheque to the bank, (3) returning of the cheque
unpaid by the drawee bank, (4) giving notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque
demanding payment of the cheque amount, and (5) failure of the drawer to make
payment within 15 days of the receipt of the notice. It was further held that the Courts
having jurisdiction over the territorial limits wherein any of the five acts, that
constitute the components of the offence, occurred would have the jurisdiction to
deal with the case and if the five acts were done in five different areas, any one of the
Courts exercising jurisdiction in those five areas would have jurisdiction and the
complainant could choose any one of those Courts.
7. Thereafter, in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of Maharashtra [(2014) 9 SCC
129], a 3-Judges Bench of this Court observed that the return of the cheque by the
drawee bank would alone constitute commission of the offence under Section 138 of
the Act of 1881 and would indicate the place where the offence is committed. It was,
therefore, held that the place, situs or venue of judicial inquiry and trial of the offence
must logically be restricted to where the drawee bank is located, i.e., where the
cheque is dishonoured upon presentation and not where the complainant’s bank is
situated.
8. In this regard, it may be noted that Section 142 of the Act of 1881, titled
‘Cognizance of Offences’, provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, no Court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under Section 138 except on a complaint in writing made by the payee or,
as the case may be, the holder in due course of the cheque; such complaint is made
within one month of the date on which the cause of action arises under clause I of the
proviso to Section 138;
and no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class
shall try an offence punishable under Section 138.
9. Significantly, the aforestated original Section 142 of the Act of 1881 was renumbered as Section
142(1) when amendments were made in the Act of 1881 by the Negotiable Instruments
(Amendment) Act, 2015 (Act 26 of 2015). Further, Section 142(2) was inserted in the statute book
along with Section 142-A. The newly inserted Section 142(2), to the extent relevant, states that the
offence under Section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction - (a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank
where the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is situated.
10. This being the statutory scheme, stress is laid by Mr. Chirag M. Shroff, learned counsel, upon the
words: ‘shall be inquired into and tried only by a Court within whose local jurisdiction……’in Section
142(2) to contend that the Courts at Nagpur would have exclusive jurisdiction in relation to the
dishonoured cheques presented by the respondent company through its bank at Nagpur.
11. Perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons in Amendment Act 26 of 2015 makes it amply
clear that insertion of Sections 142(2) and 142-A in the Act of 1881 was a direct consequence of the
judgment of this Court in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra). Therefore, the use of the phrase:
‘shall be inquired into and tried only by a Court within whose local jurisdiction……’in Section 142(2)
of the Act 1881 is contextual to the ratio laid down in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra) to the
contrary, whereby territorial jurisdiction to try an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881
vested in the Court having jurisdiction over the drawee bank and not the complainant’s bank where
he had presented the cheque. Section 142(2) now makes it clear that the jurisdiction to try such an
offence would vest only in the Court within whose jurisdiction the branch of the Bank where the
cheque was delivered for collection, through the account of the payee or holder in due course, is
situated. The newly inserted Section 142-A further clarifies this position by validating the transfer of
pending cases to the Courts conferred with such jurisdiction after the amendment.
12. The later decision of this Court in Bridgestone India Private Limited v. Inderpal Singh [(2016) 2
SCC 75] affirmed the legal position obtaining after the amendment of the Act of 1881 and endorsed
that Section 142(2)(a) of the Act of 1881 vests jurisdiction for initiating proceedings for an offence
under Section 138 in the Court where the cheque is delivered for collection, i.e., through an account
in the branch of the bank where the payee or holder in due course maintains an account. This Court
also affirmed that Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra) would not non-suit the company in so far as
territorial jurisdiction for initiating proceedings under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 was
concerned.” (Emphasis supplied)
17. In Yogesh Upadhaya (Supra), this Court also considered the effect of the non obstante clause in
Section 142(1) of the N.I. Act so as to examine whether the same would override Section 406 Cr.P.C.
In this regard the court observed thus:
“13. Therefore, institution of the first two complaint cases before the Courts at
Nagpur is in keeping with the legal position obtaining now. However, the contention
that the non obstante clause in Section 142(1) of the Act of 1881 would override
Section 406 Cr. P.C. and that it would not be permissible for this Court to transfer the
said complaint cases, in exercise of power thereunder, cannot be countenanced. It
may be noted that the non obstante clause was there in the original Section 142 itself
and was not introduced by way of the amendments in the year 2015, along with
Section 142(2). The said clause merely has reference to the manner in which
cognizance is to be taken in offences under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, as a
departure has to be made from the usual procedure inasmuch as prosecution for the
said offence stands postponed despite commission of the offence being complete
upon dishonour of the cheque and it must necessarily be in terms of the procedure
prescribed. The clause, therefore, has to be read and understood in the context and
for the purpose it is used and it does not lend itself to the interpretation that Section
406 Cr. P.C. would stand excluded vis-à-vis offences under Section 138 of the Act of
1881. The power of this Court to transfer pending criminal proceedings under Section
406 Cr. P.C. does not stand abrogated thereby in respect of offences under Section
138 of the Act of 1881. It may be noted that this Court exercised power under Section
406 Cr. P.C. in relation to offences under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 even during
the time the original Section 142 held the field. In A.E. Premanand v. Escorts Finance
Ltd. [(2004) 13 SCC 527], this Court took note of the fact that the offences therein,
under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, had arisen out of one single transaction and
found it appropriate and in the interest of justice that all such cases should be tried in
one Court. We, therefore, hold that, notwithstanding the non obstante clause in
Section 142(1) of the Act of 1881, the power of this Court to transfer criminal cases
under Section 406 Cr.
P.C. remains intact in relation to offences under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, if it is found
expedient for the ends of justice.
14. In the case on hand, as the six complaint cases pertain to the same transaction, it would be
advisable to have a common adjudication to obviate the possibility of contradictory findings being
rendered in connection therewith by different Courts. As four of the six cases have been filed by the
respondent company before the Dwarka Courts at New Delhi and only two such cases are pending
before the Courts at Nagpur, Maharashtra, it would be convenient and in the interest of all
concerned, including the parties and their witnesses, that the cases be transferred to the Dwarka
Courts at New Delhi.”
18. Thus, in Yogesh Upadhaya (supra), this Court took note of K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan
Balan reported in (1999) 7 SCC 510, wherein it was held that an offence under Section 138 of the N.I.
Act has five components:
(i) drawing of the cheque,
(ii) presentation of the cheque to the bank,
(iii) returning of the cheque unpaid by the drawee bank,
(iv) giving notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque demanding payment of the
cheque amount, and
(v) failure of the drawer to make payment within 15 days of the receipt of the notice.
19. It was further held that the jurisdiction to deal with the case vests in the Court having
jurisdiction over the territorial limits wherein any of the five acts referred to above that constitute
the components of the offence, occurred. If the five acts were done in five different areas, then any
one of the Courts exercising jurisdiction in those five areas would have jurisdiction and the
complainant could choose any one of those Courts.
20. Further, it relied on Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2014) 9
SCC 129, wherein it was held that the place, situs or venue of judicial inquiry and trial of the offence
must logically be restricted to where the drawee bank is located, i.e., where the cheque is
dishonoured upon presentation and not where the complainant’s bank is situated.
21. The Court took note of Section 142 of the N.I. Act and the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Act, 2015, and said that the newly inserted Section 142(2) provides that the offence under Section
138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a Court within whose local jurisdiction – (a) if the
cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the payee or
holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is situated.
22. The Court after examining the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the N.I. Amendment Act,
2015, stated that the insertion of Sections 142(2) and 142-A in the N.I. Act was a direct consequence
of the judgment in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra). Section 142(2) now makes it clear that the
jurisdiction to try such an offence would vest only in the Court within whose jurisdiction the branch
of the Bank where the cheque was delivered for collection, through the account of the payee or
holder in due course, is situated. The newly inserted Section 142-A further clarifies this position by
validating the transfer of pending cases to the Courts conferred with such jurisdiction after the
amendment came into force.
23. The Court further noted that Bridgestone India Private Limited (Supra) affirmed the change in
legal position after the amendment of the N.I. Act and endorsed that Section 142(2)(a) vests
jurisdiction for initiating proceedings for an offence under Section 138 in the Court where the
cheque is delivered for collection, i.e., through an account in the branch of the bank where the payee
or holder, in due course, maintains an account.
24. Therefore, the Court said that the institution of the first two complaint cases before the Courts at
Nagpur would be in accordance with the changed legal position after the amendment came into
force. However, it rejected the contention that the non obstante clause in Section 142(1) of the NI
Act would override Section 406 CrPC and that it would not be permissible for this Court to transfer
the said complaint cases.
25. The Court noted that the non obstante clause was already present in the original Section 142(1)
and was not introduced by way of the amendments in the year 2015, along with Section 142(2). The
non obstante clause merely has reference to the manner in which cognizance is to be taken in an
offence under Section 138. The same must not be construed to mean that the power of this Court to
transfer pending criminal proceedings under Section 406 CrPC stands abrogated thereby in respect
of an offence under Section 138 of the NI Act.
26. After placing reliance on A.E. Premanand v. Escorts Finance Ltd., reported in (2004) 13 SCC 52,
the Court had held that notwithstanding the non obstante clause in Section 142(1) of the NI Act, the
power of this Court to transfer criminal cases under Section 406 Cr.P.C. remains intact in relation to
an offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act, if it is found expedient for the ends of justice to order
such transfer.
27. Before we proceed further it is necessary to clarify that in Yogesh Upadhaya (supra) this Court
was dealing with the transfer of six complaint cases under Sections 138 and 142 of the N.I. Act.
Ultimately, considering Section 142(2) along with Section 142-A of the N.I. Act, this Court held that
two out of six complaints instituted at Nagpur were in accordance with the legal position. However,
since the other four complaints also pertained to the same transaction, the court felt that it would be
advisable to have a common adjudication with a view to obviate the possibility of any contradictory
findings being rendered in connection with the said complaints by different courts. In such
circumstances, all the six complaints were ordered to be transferred to the South-west district
courts, Dwarka, New Delhi.
SECTION 406 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
28. We now proceed to consider Section 406 of the Cr.P.C. Section 406 Cr.P.C. reads as under:
“406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals.
(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this
section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case or
appeal be transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal
Court subordinate to one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior
jurisdiction subordinate to another High Court.
(2)The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the
Attorney-General of India or of a party interested, and every such application shall be
made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of
India or the Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.
(3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is
dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was
frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any
person who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand
rupees as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances of the case.”
29. The present section corresponds to Section 527 of the old Cr.P.C.
The Cr.P.C. clothes this Court with the power under Section 406 to transfer a case or appeal from
one High Court or a Court subordinate to one High Court to another High Court or to a Court
subordinate thereto. The expression therein “expedient for the ends of justice” assumes significance.
30. The power to transfer vested .P.C. is concerned, is dealt with
and was intended by the Legislature to be dealt with solely by Section 407 (Section 526 of the old
Cr.P.C.). On the other hand, Section 406(1) (Section 527(1) of the old CrPC) clearly implies that it is
only the Supreme Court that has the power to transfer a case pending in a Court subordinate to one
High Court to be tried by a Court subordinate to another High Court.
31. A case is transferred by virtue of the powers under Section 406 if there is a reasonable
apprehension on the part of a party to a case that justice will not be done. There, however, must be
reliable material from which it can be inferred that there are impediments that are interfering or
likely to interfere, either directly or indirectly, with the cause of justice.
POSITION OF LAW
32. In Kaushik Chatterjee v. State of Haryana and Ors. reported in (2020) 10 SCC 92, this Court, in
an identical situation like the one on hand, held as under:
“8. Thus, in effect, transfer is sought primarily on two grounds, namely, (i) lack of
territorial jurisdiction and (ii) apprehension of bias.
xxx xxx xxx
17. As seen from the pleadings and the rival contentions, the petitioner seeks transfer,
primarily on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction. While the question of
territorial jurisdiction in civil cases, revolves mainly around (i) cause of action; or (ii)
location of the subject-matter of the suit or (iii) the residence of the defendant, etc.,
according as the case may be, the question of territorial jurisdiction in criminal cases
revolves around (i) place of commission of the offence or (ii) place where the
consequence of an act, both of which constitute an offence, ensues or (iii) place where
the accused was found or
(iv) place where the victim was found or (v) place where the property in respect of
which the offence was committed, was found or (vi) place where the property forming
the subjectmatter of an offence was required to be returned or accounted for, etc., according as the case may
18. While jurisdiction of a civil court is determined by (i) territorial and (ii) pecuniary limits, the
jurisdiction of a criminal court is determined by (i) the offence and/or (ii) the offender. But the main
difference between the question of jurisdiction raised in civil cases and the question of jurisdiction
arising in criminal cases, is two-fold.
18.1. The first is that the stage at which an objection as to jurisdiction, territorial or pecuniary, can
be raised, is regulated in civil proceedings by Section 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. There
is no provision in the Criminal Procedure Code akin to Section 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
18.2. The second is that in civil proceedings, a plaint can be returned, under Order 7 Rule 10 CPC, to
be presented to the proper court, at any stage of the proceedings. But in criminal proceedings, a
limited power is available to a Magistrate under Section 201 of the Criminal Procedure Code, to
return a complaint. The power is limited in the sense (a) that it is available before taking cognizance,
as Section 201 uses the words “Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance” and (b) that the
power is limited only to complaints, as the word “complaint”, as defined by Section 2(d), does not
include a “police report”.
19. Chapter XIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 contains provisions relating to jurisdiction
of criminal courts in inquiries and trials. The Code maintains a distinction between
(i) inquiry; (ii) investigation; and (iii) trial. The words “inquiry” and “investigation” are defined
respectively, in clauses (g) and
(h) of Section 2 of the Code.
20. The principles laid down in Sections 177 to 184 of the Code (contained in Chapter XIII)
regarding the jurisdiction of criminal courts in inquiries and trials can be summarised in simple
terms as follows:
20.1. Every offence should ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a court within
whose local jurisdiction it was committed. This rule is found in Section 177. The
expression “local jurisdiction” found in Section 177 is defined in Section 2(j) to mean
“in relation to a court or Magistrate, means the local area within which the court or
Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under the Code”.
20.2. In case of uncertainty about the place in which, among the several local areas,
an offence was committed, the Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas
may inquire into or try such an offence.
20.3. Where an offence is committed partly in one area and partly in another, it may
be inquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
20.4. In the case of a continuing offence which is committed in more local areas than
one, it may be inquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction over any of such
local areas.
20.5. Where an offence consists of several acts done in different local areas it may be
inquired into or tried by a court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
(Numbers 2 to 5 are traceable to Section 178) 20.6. Where something is an offence by
reason of the act done, as well as the consequence that ensued, then the offence may
be inquired into or tried by a court within whose local jurisdiction either the act was
done or the consequence ensued. (Section
179) 20.7. In cases where an act is an offence, by reason of its relation to any other act
which is also an offence, then the first mentioned offence may be inquired into or
tried by a court within whose local jurisdiction either of the acts was done. (Section
180) 20.8. In certain cases such as dacoity, dacoity with murder, escaping from
custody, etc., the offence may be inquired into and tried by a court within whose local
jurisdiction either the offence was committed or the accused person was found.
20.9. In the case of an offence of kidnapping or abduction, it may be inquired into or tried by a court
within whose local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or conveyed or concealed or detained.
20.10. The offences of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a court within
whose local jurisdiction, the offence was committed or the stolen property was possessed, received
or retained.
20.11. An offence of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or
tried by a court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or any part of the
property was received or retained or was required to be returned or accounted for by the accused
person.
20.12. An offence which includes the possession of stolen property, may be inquired into or tried by
a court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was
possessed by any person, having knowledge that it is stolen property. (Nos. 8 to 12 are found in
Section 181) 20.13. An offence which includes cheating, if committed by means of letters or
telecommunication messages, may be inquired into or tried by any court within whose local
jurisdiction such letters or messages were sent or received.
20.14. An offence of cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of the property may be inquired into
or tried by a court within whose local jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person deceived
or was received by the accused person.
20.15. Some offences relating to marriage such as Section 494 IPC (marrying again during the
lifetime of husband or wife) and Section 495 IPC (committing the offence under Section 494 with
concealment of former marriage) may be inquired into or tried by a court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the offender last resided with the spouse by the first
marriage. (Nos. 13 to 15 are found in Section 182) 20.16. An offence committed in the course of a
journey or voyage may be inquired into or tried by a court through or into whose local jurisdiction
that person or thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage. (Section 183).
20.17. Cases falling under Section 219 (three offences of the same kind committed within a space of
twelve months whether in respect of the same person or not), cases falling under Section 220
(commission of more offences than one, in one series of acts committed together as to form the
same transaction) and cases falling under Section 221, (where it is doubtful what offences have been
committed), may be inquired into or tried by any court competent to inquire into or try any of the
offences. (Section
184).
21. Apart from Sections 177 to 184, which lay down in elaborate detail, the rules relating to
jurisdiction, Chapter XIII of the Code also contains a few other sections. Section 185 empowers the
State Government to order any case or class of cases committed for trial in any district, to be tried in
any Sessions Division. Section 186 empowers the High Court, in case where two or more courts have
taken cognizance of the same offence and a question as to which of them should inquire into or try
the offence has arisen, to decide the district where the inquiry or trial shall take place. Section 187
speaks of the powers of the Magistrate, in case where a person within his local jurisdiction, has
committed an offence outside his jurisdiction, but the same cannot be inquired into or tried within
such jurisdiction. Sections 188 and 189 deal with offences committed outside India.
22. After laying down in such great detail, the rules relating to territorial jurisdiction in Chapter
XIII, the Code of Criminal Procedure makes provisions in Chapter XXXV, as to the fate of irregular
proceedings. It is in that Chapter XXXV that one has to search for an answer to the question as to
what happens when a court which has no territorial jurisdiction, inquires or tries an offence.
23. Section 460 lists out 9 irregularities, which, if done in good faith by the Magistrate, may not
vitiate his proceedings. Section 461 lists out 17 irregularities, which if done by the Magistrate, will
make the whole proceedings void. Clause (l) of Section 461 is of significance and it reads as follows:
“461. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings.—If any Magistrate, not being
empowered by law in this behalf, does any of the following things, namely—
(a)-(k) ***
(l) tries an offender:
*** his proceedings shall be void”
24. Then comes Section 462, which saves the proceedings that had taken place in a
wrong Sessions Division or district or local area. But this is subject to the condition
that no failure of justice has occasioned on account of the mistake. Section 462 reads
as follows:
“462. Proceedings in wrong place.—No finding, sentence or order of any criminal
court shall be set aside merely on the ground that the inquiry, trial or other
proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, took place in a wrong
Sessions Division, district, sub-division or other local area, unless it appears that
such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice.”
25. A cursory reading of Sections 461(l) and 462 gives an impression that there is
some incongruity. Under clause (l) of Section 461 if a Magistrate not being
empowered by law to try an offender, wrongly tries him, his proceedings shall be
void. A proceeding which is void under Section 461 cannot be saved by Section 462.
The focus of clause (l) of Section 461 is on the “offender” and not on the “offence”. If
clause (l) had used the words “tries an offence” rather than the words “tries an
offender”, the consequence might have been different.
26. It is significant to note that Section 460, which lists out nine irregularities that
would not vitiate the proceedings, uses the word “offence” in three places, namely,
clauses (b), (d) and (e).
Section 460 does not use the word “offender” even once.
27. On the contrary Section 461 uses the word “offence” only once, namely, in clause (a), but uses
the word “offender” twice, namely, in clauses (l) and (m). Therefore, it is clear that if an offender is
tried by a Magistrate not empowered by law in that behalf, his proceedings shall be void under
Section 461. Section 462 does not make the principle contained therein to have force
notwithstanding anything contained in Section 461.
28. Section 26 of the Code divides offences into two categories, namely, (i) offences under IPC and
(ii) offences under any other special law. Insofar as offences under IPC are concerned, clause
(a) of Section 26 states that they may be tried by (i) the High Court or (ii) the Court of Session or (iii)
any other court, by which such offence is shown in the first Schedule to be triable. In respect of
offences under any other law, clause (b) of Section 26 states that they shall be tried by the court
specifically mentioned in such special law. In case the special law is silent about the court by which
it can be tried, then such an offence may be tried either by the High Court or by any other court by
which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable.
29. But clause (a) of Section 26 makes the provisions contained therein, subject to the other
provisions of the Code. Therefore, a question arose before this Court in State of U.P. v. Sabir Ali
[State of U.P. v. Sabir Ali, AIR 1964 SC 1673 : (1964) 2 Cri LJ 606] as to whether a conviction and
punishment handed over by a Magistrate of First Class for an offence under the Uttar Pradesh
Private Forest Act, 1948 were void, in the light of Section 15(2) of the Special Act. Section 15(2) of
the Uttar Pradesh Private Forest Act made the offences under the Act triable only by a Magistrate of
Second or Third Class. Though the entire trial in that case took place before a Magistrate of Second
Class, he was conferred with the powers of a Magistrate of First Class, before he pronounced the
judgment. This Court held that the proceedings were void under Section 530(p) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (as it stood at that time). It is relevant to note that Section 461(l) of the
1973 Code is in pari materia with Section 530(p) of the 1898 Code.
30. What is now clause (a) of Section 26 of the 1973 Code, is what was Section 28 of the 1898 Code.
The only difference between the two is that Section 28 of the 1898 Code referred to the eighth
column of the Second Schedule, but Section 26(a) of the 1973 Code refers to the First Schedule.
Similarly, clause (b) of Section 26 of the 1973 Code is nothing but what was Section 29 of the 1898
Code.
31. What is significant to note from the 1898 Code and the 1973 Code is that the question of
jurisdiction dealt with by Sections 28 and 29 of the 1898 Code and Section 26 of the 1973 Code, is
relatable only to the offence and not to the offender. The power of a court to try an offence is directly
governed by clauses (a) and (b) of Section 26 of the 1973 Code, as it was governed by Sections 28
and 29 of the 1898 Code.
32. In other words, the jurisdiction of a criminal court is normally relatable to the offence and in
some cases, to the offender, such as cases where the offender is a juvenile (Section
27) or where the victim is a women [the proviso to clause (a) of Section 26]. But Section 461(l)
focuses on the offender and not on the offence.
33. The saving clause contained in Section 462 of the 1973 Code is in pari materia with Section 531
of the 1898 Code. In the light of Section 531 of the 1898 Code, a question arose before the Calcutta
High Court in Ramnath Sardar v. Rekharani Sardar [Ramnath Sardar v. Rekharani Sardar, 1975
SCC OnLine Cal 168 : 1975 Cri LJ 1139] , as to the stage at which an objection to the territorial
jurisdiction of the court could be raised and considered. In that case, the objection to the territorial
jurisdiction raised before a Magistrate in a petition for maintenance filed by the wife against the
husband, was rejected by the Magistrate both on merits and on the basis of the saving clause in
Section 531. But the High Court held [Ramnath Sardar v. Rekharani Sardar, 1975 SCC OnLine Cal
168 : 1975 Cri LJ 1139] that Section 531 would apply only after the decision or finding or order is
arrived at by any Magistrate or court in a wrong jurisdiction and that if any objection to the
territorial jurisdiction is taken in any proceeding, it would be the duty of the Magistrate to deal with
the same.
34. In Raj Kumari Vijh v. Dev Raj Vijh [Raj Kumari Vijh v. Dev Raj Vijh, (1977) 2 SCC 190 : 1977 SCC
(Cri) 294 : AIR 1977 SC 1101] , which also arose out of a case filed by the wife for maintenance
against the husband, the Magistrate rejected a prayer for deciding the question of jurisdiction before
recording the evidence. Actually the Magistrate passed an order holding that the question of
jurisdiction must await the recording of the evidence on the whole case. Ultimately the Magistrate
held that he had jurisdiction to entertain the application. One of the reasons why he came to the said
conclusion was that in the reply filed by the husband there was no specific denial of the wife's
allegation that the parties last resided together within his jurisdiction. When the matter eventually
reached this Court, this Court relied upon the decision in Purushottamdas Dalmia v. State of W.B.
[Purushottamdas Dalmia v. State of W.B., AIR 1961 SC 1589 : (1961) 2 Cri LJ 728] to point out that
there are two types of jurisdictional issues for a criminal court, namely, (i) the jurisdiction with
respect of the power of the court to try particular kinds of offences, and (ii) its territorial
jurisdiction.
35. It was specifically held by this Court in Raj Kumari Vijh [Raj Kumari Vijh v. Dev Raj Vijh, (1977)
2 SCC 190 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 294 : AIR 1977 SC 1101] that the question of jurisdiction with respect to
the power of the court to try particular kinds of offences goes to the root of the matter and that any
transgression of the same would make the entire trial void. However, territorial jurisdiction,
according to this Court “is a matter of convenience, keeping in mind the administrative point of view
with respect to the work of a particular court, the convenience of the accused … and the convenience
of the witnesses who have to appear before the Court”. (SCC p. 194 para 7)
36. After making such a distinction between two different types of jurisdictional issues, this Court
concluded in that case, that where a Magistrate has the power to try a particular offence, but the
controversy relates solely to his territorial jurisdiction, the case would normally be covered by the
saving clause under Section 531 of the 1898 Code (present Section 462 of the 1973 Code).
37. From the above discussion, it is possible to take a view that the words “tries an offence” are more
appropriate than the words “tries an offender” in Section 461(l). This is because, lack of jurisdiction
to try an offence cannot be cured by Section 462 and hence Section 461, logically, could have
included the trial of an offence by a Magistrate, not empowered by law to do so, as one of the several
items which make the proceedings void. In contrast, the trial of an offender by a court which does
not have territorial jurisdiction, can be saved because of Section 462, provided there is no other bar
for the court to try the said offender (such as in Section 27). But Section 461(l) makes the
proceedings of a Magistrate void, if he tried an offender, when not empowered by law to do.
38. But be that as it may, the upshot of the above discussion is:
38.1. That the issue of jurisdiction of a court to try an “offence” or “offender” as well
as the issue of territorial jurisdiction, depend upon facts established through
evidence.
38.2. That if the issue is one of territorial jurisdiction, the same has to be decided
with respect to the various rules enunciated in Sections 177 to 184 of the Code.
38.3. That these questions may have to be raised before the court trying the offence
and such court is bound to consider the same.
39. Having taken note of the legal position, let me now come back to the cases on
hand.
40. As seen from the pleadings, the type of jurisdictional issue, raised in the cases on
hand, is one of territorial jurisdiction, at least as of now. The answer to this depends
upon facts to be established by evidence. The facts to be established by evidence, may
relate either to the place of commission of the offence or to other things dealt with by
Sections 177 to 184 of the Code. In such circumstances, this Court cannot order
transfer, on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction, even before evidence is
marshalled. Hence, the transfer petitions are liable to be dismissed. Accordingly, they
are dismissed.
41. However, it is open to both parties to raise the issue of territorial jurisdiction, lead
evidence on questions of fact that may fall within the purview of Sections 177 to 184
read with Section 26 of the Code and invite a finding. With the above observations
the transfer petitions are dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.”
33. Thus, this Court said the following:
(i) the issue of jurisdiction of a court to try an “offence” or “offender” as well as the
issue of territorial jurisdiction, depend upon facts established through evidence;
(ii) if the issue is one of territorial jurisdiction, the same has to be decided with
respect to the various rules enunciated in sections 177 to 184 of the Code; and
(iii) these questions may have to be raised before the court trying the offence and
such court is bound to consider the same.
34. While jurisdiction of a civil court is determined by (i) territorial and (ii) pecuniary limits, the
jurisdiction of a criminal court is determined by (i) the offence and/or (ii) the offender. But the main
difference between the question of jurisdiction raised in civil cases and the question of jurisdiction
arising in criminal cases, is two-fold i.e.:
CIVIL COURT CRIMINAL COURT
The stage at which an There is no provision in the
objection as to jurisdiction, Criminal Procedure Code akin
territorial or pecuniary, can be to Section 21 of the Code of
raised, is regulated in civil Civil Procedure.
proceedings by Section 21 of
the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
In civil proceedings, a plaint But in criminal proceedings, a
can be returned, under Order limited power is available to a
VII, Rule 10, CPC, to be Magistrate under section 201 of
presented to the proper court, the Code, to return a
at any complaint. The power is limited
stage of the proceedings in the sense that:
But in criminal proceedings, a
limited power is available to a
Magistrate under section 201 of
the Code, to return a
complaint. The power is limited
in the sense that:
1. it is available before
taking cognizance, as
section 201 uses the
words “Magistrate who
is not competent to take
cognizance”
2. the power is limited
only to complaints, as
the word “complaint”,
as defined by section
2(d), does not include a
“police report”.
35. The Court looked into the following distinction:
“TRIES AN OFFENCE” VERSUS “TRIES AN OFFENDER” UNDER SECTION 461(l)
CrPC, WHICH IS MORE APPROPRIATE?
The rules relating to territorial jurisdiction are given in Chapter XIII in detail.
However, it is in that Chapter XXXV that one has to search for an answer to the
question as to what happens when a court which has no territorial jurisdiction,
inquires or tries an offence.
A cursory reading of Section 461(l) and Section 462 gives an impression that there is
some incongruity. Under Clause (l) of Section 461 if a Magistrate not being
empowered by law to try an offender, wrongly tries him, his proceedings shall be
void.
A proceeding which is void under Section 461 cannot be saved by Section 462
36. The focus of clause (l) of Section 461 18 is on the “offender” and not on the “offence”. If clause (l)
had used the words “tries an offence” rather than the words “tries an offender”, the consequence
might have been different.
37. Section 460, which lists out nine irregularities that would not vitiate the proceedings, uses the
word “offence” in three places namely clauses (b), (d) and (e). Section 460 does not use the word
“offender” even once. On the contrary Section 461 uses the word ‘offence’ only once, namely in
clause (a), but uses the word “offender” twice namely in clauses (l) and (m).
38. Therefore, it is clear that if an offender is tried by a Magistrate not empowered by law in that
behalf, his proceedings shall be void under Section 461. Section 462 does not make the principle
contained therein to have force notwithstanding anything contained in Section 461.
39. Hence, the jurisdiction of a criminal Court is normally relatable to the offence and in some cases,
to the offender, such as cases where the offender is a juvenile (section 27) or where the victim is a
women [the proviso to clause (a) of section 26]. But Section 461(l) focuses on the offender and not
on the offence. The saving clause contained in Section 462 of the Code of 1973 is in pari materia with
Section 531 of the Code of 1898.
40. Considering the aforementioned scheme of CrPC, the Court held that the words “tries an
offence” are more appropriate than the words “tries an offender” in section 461 (l). This is because,
lack of jurisdiction to try an offence cannot be cured by section 462 and hence section 461, logically,
could have included the trial of an offence by a Magistrate, not empowered by law to do so, as one of
the several items which make the proceedings void.
41. In contrast, the trial of an offender by a court which does not have territorial jurisdiction, can be
saved because of section 462, provided there is no other bar for the court to try the said offender
(such as in section 27). But Section 461 (l) makes the proceedings of a Magistrate void, if he tried an
offender, when not empowered by law to do.
42. Thus, in the aforesaid case, this Court declined to transfer the matter having noticed that the
case was one of territorial jurisdiction. In such circumstances, this Court left it open to both the
parties, i.e., the accused and the complainant to raise the issue of territorial jurisdiction before the
court concerned.
43. In the case of United States v. National City Lines, reported in 337 U.S. 78, the U.S. district court
of the southern district of California observed thus:
“The Discretionary Power to Transfer:
There remains the question: Do the facts warrant the granting of the motion?
A Conditions for Transfer Before answering this question by reference to the facts, we
consider briefly the meaning of the transfer provision. The wording of the clause is
different from that of the corresponding provision in the criminal rules. The latter
calls for a transfer "if the court is satisfied that in the interest of justice the
proceeding should be transferred." The section under consideration provides for
transfer "for the convenience of parties and witnesses in the interest of justice” While
both sections use the identical phrase "in the interest of justice” as a criterion, the
civil transfer rule uses the phrase in juxtaposition with the convenience requirement.
But the meaning of the phrase is the same in both instances:
“It implies conditions which assist, or are in aid of or in the furtherance of, justice.
Both call for the doing of things which bring about the type of justice which results
when law is correctly applied and administered. They import the exercise of
discretion which considers both the interests of the defendant and those of society.
When commanded by a statute, they do not attempt to determine, in advance, the
type of judicial action to be taken."
In the case in which the phrase just quoted occurs, I considered the convenience of
parties and witnesses as one of the criteria in determining whether a transfer should
be made. And in the present case, I took into account the same element in
considering the application of the doctrine of forum non conveniens. In so doing, I
did not weigh the convenience of the defendants only, but that of the Government
also. The conclusion was arrived at after a balancing of conveniences. This is of the
very essence of the judicial process in any matter which calls for the exercise of
discretion. Indeed, I wrote:
"A court of equity should aim to balance societal and individual interest and to [41]
maintain the proper equilibrium between private rights and public weal."
*743 The transfer provision which concerns us here depends on discretion for its
application, as do the kindred provision in the criminal cases and the doctrine of
inconvenient forum.
B Should the Discretion be Exercised?
Having determined that the transfer provision is applicable to this litigation, our next
inquiry is whether the discretion should be exercised under the facts in the case.
The factual situation did not change while the matter was before the Supreme Court.
It is the same as existed when I granted the motion to dismiss. The affidavits filed
with the prior motion have been refiled and adopted for the purposes of the present
motions. The Government has filed no additional affidavits. But it was agreed at the
hearing that the additional facts contained in the affidavit of Jesse R. O'Malley, one of
counsel for the Government, in opposition to the affidavit of Denis B. Sullivan, filed
in opposition to the Government's motion for an early trial date, might be considered.
The affidavit merely recites that a transfer to the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern
Division, might result in delay because of the crowded condition of the calendar of
that court. It points to the fact that the transfer of the criminal case had resulted in
delay.
Speculations as to possible time of trial are not determinative of the matter.
Regardless of the condition of their calendars, district courts have it within their
power to advance cases when public interest so requires. And if the need for
immediate action is brought home to the judges of the District Court of Illinois, I am
certain that they will arrange for as early a trial of this cause as could be had in this
district. In the instant case, the Government could very readily have avoided the
delay which resulted from its direct appeal from my ruling by refiling the case
immediately in the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division, especially when the
defendants had stipulated that they would not seek a dismissal if so refiled.
I do not question the Government's right to seek the alternative of appeal in order to
avoid a decision which it disapproved and which it did not desire to become
established as an unchallenged precedent. However, in balancing the conveniences,
we must exclude situations such as delay brought on by the voluntary act of the
Government when it had another alternative.
*744 I need not repeat the summary of the affidavits given in the two previous
opinions.” Having re-examined them, and having considered the additional affidavits
and facts in the record to which my attention has been called by both parties, I am of
the view that the convenience of the parties and witnesses require the transfer of this
case in the interest of justice.
Anticipating that such conclusion might be based on a balancing of conveniences,
counsel for the Government intimated at the hearing that no resort could be had to
such method in resolving the conflicting contentions. I agree that when the section
speaks of the convenience "of parties and witnesses, it means that the convenience of
both sides must be examined. But I know of no way of applying the requirement to a
particular situation than by viewing the facts from both standpoints and giving
preference to those which, in the court's opinion, preponderate to such an extent as
to make the choice in the interest of justice. Unless the right to choose between
conflicting facts or assertions exists, the court could never determine a motion under
this section on the facts. For if the mere assertion by the Government of its own
convenience and the convenience of its witnesses were sufficient to stay action, we
would be confronted with a power to paralyze judicial discretion, beside which the
devastating effect of the historic liberum veto ("Nie Pozwalan” "I don't permit") of the
Polish nobles in their Diet (1572-1697) would dim into insignificance.
As I cannot so interpret the meaning of the section, I conclude that the showing in
this case warrants transfer to the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division.”
(Emphasis supplied)
44. In Bhiaru Ram & Ors. v. Central Bureau of Investigation & Ors reported in (2010)
7 SCC 799 this Court observed thus:
“7. Section 406 of the Code of Criminal Procedure empowers this Court to transfer
any case or appeal from one High Court to another High Court or from a criminal
court subordinate to one High Court to another criminal court of equal or superior
jurisdiction subordinate to another High Court. We are concerned about sub-section
(1) of Section 406 which reads as under:
“406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals.— (1) Whenever it is
made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this section is expedient
for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case or appeal be transferred
from one High Court to another High Court or from a criminal court subordinate to
one High Court to another criminal court of equal or superior jurisdiction
subordinate to another High Court.”
8. It is clear from the abovesaid provision that for the ends of justice, this Court can
transfer any criminal case or appeal to any place. In order to transfer a case from one
State to another or from one place to another, there must be “reasonable
apprehension” on the part of the party to a case that justice may not be done. Mere
allegation that there is apprehension that justice will not be done, cannot be the basis
of transfer. In fact, in the case on hand, it is not the claim of the petitioners that they
may not get fair justice at Special Court, CBI, Greater Mumbai but they are seeking
transfer mainly on the basis of convenience stating that all of them are hailing from
Rajasthan and majority of the witnesses going to be examined are from Jaipur,
Rajasthan.
9. In a recent judgment pronounced on 23-7-2010 in D.A.V. Boys Sr. Sec. School v.
D.A.V. College Managing Committee [(2010) 8 SCC 401], this Court while
considering the power of this Court to transfer suits, appeals, etc. on the civil side
under Section 25 of the Civil Procedure Code has held that:
“Section 25 of the Code itself makes it clear that if any application is made for
transfer, after notice to the parties, if the Court is satisfied that an order of transfer is
expedient for the ends of justice necessary direction may be issued for transfer of any
suit, appeal or other proceedings from a High Court or other civil court in one State
to another High Court or other civil court in any other State. In order to maintain fair
trial, this Court can exercise this power and transfer the proceedings to an
appropriate court. The mere convenience of the parties may not be enough for the
exercise of power but it must also be shown that trial in the chosen forum will result
in denial of justice. Further illustrations are, balance of convenience or inconvenience
to the plaintiff or the defendant or witnesses and reasonable apprehension in the
mind of the litigant that he might not get justice in the court in which suit is pending.
The abovementioned instances are only illustrative in nature. In the interest of justice
and to adherence of fair trial, this Court exercises its discretion and order transfer in
a suit or appeal or other proceedings.” From the above, it is clear that the
abovementioned principles have to be kept in mind while dealing with transfer
petitions.
10. In the case on hand, except convenience, the petitioners have not pressed into
service any other ground for transfer. In fact, Mr P.H. Parekh, informed this Court
that the petitioners are willing to attend the proceedings at Delhi, if the case is
transferred to Special Court, CBI, Delhi.
11. Mr. H.P. Raval, learned Additional Solicitor General, after taking us through
specific averments made in the counteraffidavit filed on behalf of Respondents 1 and 2 (CBI), submitted that the main accused Shri B.R.
Meena is a very influential person in the State of Rajasthan and there is strong apprehension that
due to influence of Shri B.R. Meena, there would be no fair trial at Jaipur or any other place in the
State of Rajasthan. He also pointed out that the Court of Special Judge, CBI at Greater Mumbai has
ample jurisdiction to try this case because various movable properties have been found in Mumbai
and the main accused, Shri B.R. Meena, was posted in Mumbai from 2001 to the end of the check
period i.e. 4-10-2005 and this is the period during which most of the properties were allegedly
acquired by him and his family members.
12. We have already adverted to the fact that against the main accused Shri B.R. Meena, (IRS 1977),
Commissioner of Income Tax, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, a case has been registered
on 29-9-2005 under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 for possession of assets in his own name and in the name of his family members to the extent
of Rs 43,29,394 which were disproportionate to his known sources of income and could not be
satisfactorily accounted for. It further shows that Respondent 3, during the check period i.e.
1-4-1993 to 4-10-2005, acquired assets disproportionate to his known sources of income to the
extent of Rs 1,39,39,025.
13. The petitioners have been charge-sheeted for commission of offences under Section 109 read
with Section 193 IPC read with Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 for having actively aided and abetted Respondents 3 to 4 by fabricating false
evidence through preparation of false agreements to sell with the object to justify/explain the huge
cash recoveries from the residential premises of Respondent 3. It further reveals that the petitioners
entered into false transactions with Respondent 3 showing receipt of cash amounts against alleged
purchase of immovable properties from him. The stamp papers were purchased against (sic after)
registration of case and false agreements to sell were prepared in connivance with each other.
14. A perusal of the charge-sheet containing all these details clearly shows that witnesses to be
examined are not only from Jaipur, Rajasthan, but also from various other places including
Mumbai. Though the petitioners may have a little inconvenience, the mere inconvenience may not
be sufficient ground for the exercise of power of transfer but it must be shown that the trial in the
chosen forum will result in failure of justice.
15. We have already pointed out that except the plea of inconvenience on the ground that they have
to come all the way from Rajasthan no other reason was pressed into service. Even, the request for
transfer to Delhi cannot be accepted since it would not be beneficial either to the petitioners or to
the prosecution. In fact, the main accused, Respondents 3 and 4 have not filed any petition seeking
transfer. In such circumstances, the plea of the petitioners for transfer of the case from the Court of
Special Judge, CBI, Greater Mumbai to Special Judge, CBI, Jaipur on the ground of inconvenience
cannot be accepted.” (Emphasis supplied)
45. In Rajkumar Sabu v. Sabu Trade Private Limited reported in 2021 SCC OnLine SC 378 this Court
observed thus:
“5. Now the petitioner wants the criminal case pending
transferred to the Patiala House Court, New Delhi. Two main grounds have been
urged on behalf of the petitioner in support of his plea, argued by Mr. S. Guru
Krishnakumar, learned Senior Advocate. One is that the points involved in the
criminal case are similar to the suits which are being tried and determined by the
Delhi High Court. The other ground taken is that the proceeding
is being conducted in Tamil, which the petitioner does not understand. It has also
been urged on behalf of the petitioner that it would be more convenient for the
parties to conduct the proceeding in New Delhi as the civil suits are being heard in
the Delhi High Court only. The petitioner also complains about distance of over 2000
kilometres between Salem and petitioner's own place of residence at Indore and
alleges that there is no direct connectivity between these two places. The authorities
relied upon by the petitioner are (i) Sri Jayendra Saraswathy Swamigal (II), T.N. v.
State of Tamil Nadu [(2005) 8 SCC 771] and Mrudul M. Damle v. Central Bureau of
Investigation, New Delhi [(2012) 5 SCC 706]. It is also asserted on behalf of the
petitioner that the respondents have influence in Salem and he has apprehension that
he would not get impartial enquiry/investigation/trial at Salem.
6. Mr. Gopal Sankarnarayan, learned Senior Advocate has highlighted, in course of
his submissions on behalf of the respondent, the delay in approaching this Court
seeking transfer of the criminal case. As per his submission, proceeding was
registered on 5th April, 2018 and has made substantial progress.
The complaint has reached the stage of cross examination of the complainants' witnesses by the
petitioner. The transfer petition was filed on 12th January, 2021. He also points out that personal
appearance of the petitioner during trial stood dispensed with by an order of the Madras High
Court. It is also his submission that the case pending
which ought not to be mixed up with the civil suit. Relying on a judgment of a Coordinate Bench in
the case of Umesh Kumar Sharma v. State of Uttarakhand [2020 SCC OnLine SC 845] and an earlier
decision of this Court in the case of Gurcharan Dass Chadha v. State of Rajasthan [(1966) 2 SCR
678], he has argued that to sustain allegation of lack of neutrality in trial as a ground for transfer,
credible materials will have to be brought before the Court. His argument is that there is no such
material that would justify transfer on this ground. Certain decisions have been referred to on behalf
of the respondents on the point that civil and criminal proceedings can go on simultaneously in
relation to similar transactions. But I do not consider it necessary to deal with these authorities, as
that point does not arise in the present proceeding, which is a Transfer Petition.
7. I shall proceed on the basis that the suits being heard by the Delhi High Court would have points
which could overlap with those involved . But that
very fact, by itself, in my view, would not justify transfer of the said case. Substantial progress has
been made . So far as the subject-criminal case is
concerned, the ground of overlapping points in any event cannot justify the petitioner's case for
transfer as even if the petition is allowed, the criminal case shall have to proceed in the Court of
Judicial Magistrate and not . Two different
judicial fora would be hearing the civil cases and the criminal case. Whether the civil cases and the
criminal case would continue together or not is not a question which falls for determination in this
Transfer Petition. Moreover, it does not appear that earlier any complaint was made about the
proceeding being carried on at Salem. In fact, the petitioner had applied for quashing the complaint
before the Madras High Court but at that point of time, no proceeding was taken out for transferring
the criminal complaint. Moreover, on 8th June 2018, the petitioner had appeared before the Salem
Court and received copy of the criminal complaint. This has been stated in the list of dates forming
part of the Transfer Petition. At that point of time, the two earlier Transfer Petitions were pending.
Those two petitions were disposed of on 18th July 2018. The petitioner does not appear to have had
expressed their grievances on the basis of which this petition has been filed at that point of time.
Barring claims being made by the petitioner of the respondents being influential person in Salem,
no material has been produced to demonstrate that such perceived influence can impair a neutral
trial. These allegations, inter-alia, appear in an additional affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner
affirmed on 26th February, 2021. The claims of the petitioner do not match the level of unjust
influence exerted on the defence in the case of Sri Jayendra Saraswathy Swamigal (supra), on the
basis of which the transfer petition was allowed. In that case, this Court found the prosecuting
authorities were harassing the defence team of lawyers and there were materials demonstrated by
the petitioner to show that the State machinery was going out of its way in preventing the accused
from defending himself. The petitioner's case of possible tainted trial is unfounded and does not
meet the standard laid down in the cases of Gurucharan Dass Chadha (supra) and Umesh Kumar
Sharma (supra). I cannot come to a conclusion that justice would be in peril if the case continues in
the Salem Court. I am not satisfied on the basis of materials available that the petitioner would not
get impartial trial .
8. Next, I shall turn to the question of the problem of language faced by the petitioner. The
respondents seem to be carrying on their business from Salem. In course of hearing before me, no
question has been raised as regards territorial jurisdiction of the Salem Court in proceeding with the
case, the transfer of which is asked for. Now, complaint is being made that the petitioner not being
able to understand Tamil language, the case ought to be transferred to a Court in Delhi. Language
was a factor considered by this Court in the case of Sri Jayendra Saraswathy Swamigal (supra), while
selecting the Court to which the case was to be transferred. But language was not the criteria based
on which transfer of the case was directed. I have briefly discussed earlier the reason for which
transfer of the case was directed. The language factor weighed with this Court while deciding the
forum to which the case was to be transferred after decision was taken to transfer the case for
certain other reasons.
9. Ordinarily, if a Court has jurisdiction to hear a case, the case ought to proceed in that Court only.
The proceeding
on the ground contemplated in Section 406 of the 1973 Code. Jurisdiction under the aforesaid
provision ought to be sparingly used, as held in the case of Nahar Singh Yadav v. Union of India
[(2011) 1 SCC 307]. Such jurisdiction cannot be exercised on mere apprehension of one of the
parties that justice would not be done in a given case. This was broadly the ratio in the case of
Gurcharan Dass Chadha (supra). In my opinion if a Court hearing a case possesses the jurisdiction
to proceed with the same, solely based on the fact that one of the parties to that case is unable to
follow the language of that Court would not warrant exercise of jurisdiction of this Court under
Section 406 of the 1973 Code. Records reveal that aid of translator is available
which could overcome this difficulty. If required, the petitioner may take the aid of interpreter also,
as may be available.
10. The petitioner's plea for transfer is based primarily on convenience. But convenience of one of
the parties cannot be a ground for allowing his application. Transfer of a criminal case under Section
406 of the 1973 Code can be directed when such transfer would be “expedient for the ends of
justice”. This expression entails factors beyond mere convenience of the parties or one of them in
conducting a case before a Court having jurisdiction to hear the case. The parties are related, and are
essentially fighting commercial litigations filed in multiple jurisdictions. While instituting civil suits,
both the parties had chosen fora, some of which were away from their primary places of business, or
the main places of business of the defendants. The ratio of the decision of this Court in the case of
Mrudul M. Damle (supra) cannot apply in the factual context of this case. In that case, a proceeding
pending in the Court of Special Judge, CBI Cases, Rohini Courts, New Delhi was directed to be
transferred to the Special Judge, CBI cases, Court of Session, Thane. Out of 92 witnesses enlisted in
the charge sheet, 88 were from different parts of Maharashtra. That was a case which this Court
found was not “Delhi-centric”. The accused persons were based in western part of this Country. It
was because of these reasons, the case was directed to be transferred. The circumstances
surrounding the case pending . In the case of Rajesh Talwar
v. CBI [(2012) 4 SCC 217] it was held:— “46. Jurisdiction of a court to conduct criminal prosecution
is based on the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Often either the complainant or the
accused have to travel across an entire State to attend to criminal proceedings before a jurisdictional
court. In some cases to reach the venue of the trial court, a complainant or an accused may have to
travel across several States. Likewise, witnesses too may also have to travel long distances in order
to depose before the jurisdictional court. If the plea of inconvenience for transferring the cases from
one court to another, on the basis of time taken to travel to the court conducting the criminal trial is
accepted, the provisions contained
jurisdiction to try cases would be rendered meaningless. Convenience or inconvenience are
inconsequential so far as the mandate of law is concerned. The instant plea, therefore, deserves
outright rejection.”
11. For these reasons, I dismiss the present transfer petition. Connected applications, if any, shall
also stand disposed of.” (Emphasis supplied)
46. In Nahar Singh Yadav & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors. reported in (2011) 1 SCC 307, this Court
observed thus:
“22. It is, however, the trite law that power under Section 406 CrPC has to be
construed strictly and is to be exercised sparingly and with great circumspection. It
needs little emphasis that a prayer for transfer should be allowed only when there is a
well-substantiated apprehension that justice will not be dispensed impartially,
objectively and without any bias. In the absence of any material demonstrating such
apprehension, this Court will not entertain application for transfer of a trial, as any
transfer of trial from one State to another implicitly reflects upon the credibility of
not only the entire State judiciary but also the prosecuting agency, which would
include the Public Prosecutors as well.” (Emphasis supplied)
47. It follows from the above-mentioned exposition of law that transfer of cases under Section 406
Cr.P.C. may be allowed when there is a reasonable apprehension backed by evidence that justice
may not be done and mere convenience or inconvenience of the parties may not by itself be
sufficient enough to pray for transfer. The court has to appropriately balance the grounds raised in
the facts and circumstances of each case and exercise its discretion in a circumspect manner while
ordering a transfer under Section 406.
48. In Amarinder Singh v. Parkash Singh Badal reported in (2009) 6 SCC 260, while dealing with
two transfer applications preferred under Section 406 Cr.P.C. on the ground that with the change in
State Government, the trial was suffering a setback due to the influence of the new Chief Minister as
also the lack of interest by the Public Prosecutor, P. Sathasivam, J., speaking for a three-Judge
Bench has observed thus:
“18. For a transfer of a criminal case, there must be a reasonable apprehension on the
part of the party to a case that justice will not be done. It is one of the principles of
administration of justice that justice should not only be done but it should be seen to
be done. On the other hand, mere allegations that there is apprehension that justice
will not be done in a given case does not suffice. In other words, the court has further
to see whether the apprehension alleged is reasonable or not. The apprehension must
not only be entertained but must appear to the court to be a reasonable
apprehension.
19. Assurance of a fair trial is the first imperative of the dispensation of justice. The
purpose of the criminal trial is to dispense fair and impartial justice uninfluenced by
extraneous considerations. When it is shown that the public confidence in the
fairness of a trial would be seriously undermined, the aggrieved party can seek the
transfer of a case within the State under Section 407 and anywhere in the country
under Section 406 CrPC.
20. However, the apprehension of not getting a fair and impartial inquiry or trial is
required to be reasonable and not imaginary. Free and fair trial is sine qua non of
Article 21 of the Constitution. If the criminal trial is not free and fair and if it is
biased, judicial fairness and the criminal justice system would be at stake, shaking
the confidence of the public in the system.
The apprehension must appear to the court to be a reasonable one.” (Emphasis supplied)
49. Thus, although no rigid and inflexible rule or test could be laid down to decide whether or not
the power under Section 406 Cr.P.C should be exercised, yet it is manifest from a bare reading of
sub-sections (2) and (3) of the said section and on an analysis of the decisions of this Court that an
order of transfer of trial is not to be passed as a matter of routine and more particularly on the plea
of lack of territorial jurisdiction of the court to try the offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act. This
power has to be exercised cautiously and in exceptional situations, where it becomes necessary to do
so to provide credibility to the trial. Some of the broad factors which could be kept in mind while
considering an application for transfer of the trial are:
(i) when it appears that the State machinery or prosecution is acting hand in glove
with the accused, and there is likelihood of miscarriage of justice due to the
lackadaisical attitude of the prosecution;
(ii) when there is material to show that the accused may influence the prosecution
witnesses or cause physical harm to the complainant;
(iii)comparative inconvenience and hardships likely to be caused to the accused, the
complainant/the prosecution and the witnesses, besides the burden to be borne by
the State exchequer in making payment of travelling and other expenses of the
official and non-official witnesses;
(iv) a communally surcharged atmosphere, indicating some proof of inability in
holding a fair and impartial trial because of the accusations made and the nature of
the crime committed by the accused; and
(v) existence of some material from which it can be inferred that some persons are so
hostile that they are interfering or are likely to interfere, either directly or indirectly,
with the course of justice. [See: Nahar Singh Yadav & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.,
(2011) 1 SCC 307]
50. The above-mentioned factors are not exhaustive in nature and are illustrative of the
requirements of a fair trial. It is clear as a noon day that ensuring a fair trial is the predominant
consideration for a court to rule on a motion for transfer of a case. This Court in Maneka Sanjay
Gandhi v. Rani Jethmalani, reported in (1979) 4 SCC 167 has held thus:
“2. Assurance of a fair trial is the first imperative of the dispensation of justice and
the central criterion for the court to consider when a motion for transfer is made is
not the hypersensitivity or relative convenience of a party or easy availability of legal
services or like mini-grievances. Something more substantial, more compelling, more
imperilling, from the point of view of public justice and its attendant environment, is
necessitous if the Court is to exercise its power of transfer. This is the cardinal
principle although the circumstances may be myriad and vary from case to case. We
have to test the petitioner's grounds on this touchstone bearing in mind the rule that
normally the complainant has the right to choose any court having jurisdiction and
the accused cannot dictate when- the case against him should be tried. Even so, the
process of justice should not harass the parties and from that angle the court may
weigh the circumstances.” (Emphasis supplied)
51. In Maneka Sanjay Gandhi (supra), it was also held that as a general rule, it is the complainant
who has the right to choose the forum that has jurisdiction over the subject matter and the courts do
not interfere with such a right unless circumstances that hamper the ends of justice are brought to
the notice of the court by the other party.
52. In the context of our present discussion, it is pertinent to note that that Section 406 of the
Cr.P.C. uses the expression “expedient for the ends of justice”, while empowering this Court to
transfer a criminal case. The import of the expression “ends of justice” has been discussed by this
Court in Yakub Abdul Razak Memon v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2013) 13 SCC 1 wherein it
has been held that:
“1551. While dealing with such an issue, the court must not lose sight of the fact that
meaning of “ends of justice” essentially refers to justice to all the parties. This phrase
refers to the best interest of the public within the four corners of the statute. In fact, it
means preservation of proper balance between the Constitutional/statutory rights of
an individual and rights of the people at large to have the law enforced. The “ends of
justice” does not mean vague and indeterminate notions of justice, but justice
according to the law of the land.” (Emphasis supplied)
53. The expression “ends of justice” has been more elaborately elucidated in context of procedural
law . LAO, reported in (2011) 6 SCC 321,
wherein it was held that:
“29. Thus, it is an undisputed principle of law that the procedural laws are primarily
intended to achieve the ends of justice and, normally, not to shut the doors of justice
for the parties at the very threshold. We have already noticed that there is no
indefeasible divestment of right of the cross-objector in case of a delay and his rights
to file cross-objections are protected even at a belated stage by the discretion vested
in the courts. But at the same time, the court cannot lose sight of the fact that the
meaning of “ends of justice” essentially refers to justice for all the parties involved in
the litigation. It will be unfair to give an interpretation to a provision to vest a party
with a right at the cost of the other, particularly, when statutory provisions do not so
specifically or even impliedly provide for the same.
—xxx—
34. The consistent view taken by this Court is that the provisions of a statute are
normally construed to achieve the ends of justice, advance the interest of public and
to avoid multiplicity of litigation. In Dondapati Narayana Reddy v. Duggireddy
Venkatanarayana Reddy [(2001) 8 SCC 115] this Court expressed similar view in
relation to amendment of pleadings.
The principles stated in that judgment may aptly be applied generally in relation to the
interpretation of provisions of the Code. Strict construction of a procedural law is called for where
there is complete extinguishment of rights, as opposed to the cases where discretion is vested in the
courts to balance the equities between the parties to meet the ends of justice which would invite
liberal construction. (…)” (Emphasis supplied)
54. Therefore, when a complainant institutes a case in a court of his choosing and such a court has
the territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter then the transfer of such case has to be guided by
principles that would achieve the ends of justice. The meaning of “ends of justice” essentially refers
to justice for all the parties involved in the litigation.
55. Section 142 of the N.I. Act in clear terms, provides the complainant with the right to lodge a
complaint, before a court, within whose jurisdiction, the branch of the bank where the cheque is
delivered for collection, is situated. Therefore, the argument of the accused that another court might
also be empowered to take cognizance of the matter under Section 142, since the cause of action
arose within that jurisdiction, cannot by itself be a ground for seeking transfer under Section 406 of
the Cr.P.C.
56. Additionally, since Section 142(2) of the N.I. Act also speaks of cause of action, we must try to
understand what cause of action means. A Court gets jurisdiction over the matter if the cause of
action arises within the local limits of its jurisdiction. Cause of action means: “the whole bundle of
material facts which it is necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to entitle him to succeed in the
suit.” To ascertain whether the bundle of facts give rise to the cause of action and to determine
whether one or more of those facts had occurred with
entire plaint needs to be looked into and taken into consideration. In the decision rendered in State
of Madras v. C.P. Agencies reported in AIR 1960 SC 1309, this Court has quoted with approval the
following observations made in Mst. Chand Kour v. Pratab Singh reported in 15 Indian Appeals 156:
“Now the cause of action has no relation whatever to the defence which may be set up
by the defendant, nor does it depend upon the character of the relief prayed for by the
plaintiff. It refers entirely to the grounds set forth in the plaint as the cause of action,
or, in other words, to the media upon which the plaintiff asks the Court to arrive at a
conclusion in his favour.” (Emphasis supplied)
57. This Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. K.P. Ghiara, reported in 1956 SCC OnLine SC 85 held
that the venue of enquiry or trial of a case is primarily to be determined by the averments contained
in the complaint or charge sheet and unless the facts there are positively disproved, ordinarily the
Court, where the charge sheet or complaint is filed has to proceed with the matter, except where
action has to be taken under Section 202 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
58. The main plank of the submission canvassed on behalf of the petitioner seeking transfer needs to
be now looked into. According to the petitioner, there was no good reason for the Bank to file the
complaint under Section 138 of the N.I. Act in Chandigarh more particularly when the entire cause
of action could be said to have arose in Coimbatore. If not in the form of allegations, then at least in
the form of a serious grievance, the petitioner says that only with a view to harass and cause
inconvenience, the Bank lodged the complaint in Chandigarh. The Bank says that the law permits it
to file the complaint in Chandigarh as the collection centre of the Bank is in Chandigarh. According
to the Bank, the law permits filing of such a complaint at the place where a cheque is delivered for
collection at any branch of the Bank of the payee or holder in due course, as the cheque is deemed to
have been delivered to the branch of the Bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case
may be , has an account maintained.
59. There is no challenge before us to the constitutional validity of Section 142(2) of the Negotiable
Instrument Amendment Act, 2015 on the ground that the same is ultra vires Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. There was a challenge at one point of time to the validity of Section 142(2) of
the Amendment Act, 2015 before the High Court of Madras in the case of Refex Energy Ltd. v. Union
of India reported in 2019 SCC Online Mad 9941. While dismissing the writ petition and holding that
the amendment cannot be said to be ultra vires, the division bench of the High Court held as under:
“2. The contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that this amendment
amounts to setting at naught a judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court which is
not permissible in law. The contention of the petitioner cannot be accepted. It is well
settled right from the decision in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Broach Borough
Municipality reported in (1969) 2 SCC 283 : AIR 1970 Supreme Court 192 that
Legislation can take away the basis of a judgment.
3. The Honourable Supreme Court in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra) summed up
the law relating to the place of suing as under:
“56. To sum up:
(i) An offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 is
committed no sooner a cheque drawn by the accused on an account being maintained
by him in a bank for discharge of debt/liability is returned unpaid for insufficiency of
funds or for the reason that the amount exceeds the arrangement made with the
bank.
(ii) Cognizance of any such offence is however forbidden under Section 142 of the Act
except upon a complaint in writing made by the payee or holder of the cheque in due
course within a period of one month from the date the cause of action accrues to such
payee or holder under clause (c) of proviso to Section 138.
(iii) The cause of action to file a complaint accrues to a complainant/payee/holder of
a cheque in due course if
(a) the dishonoured cheque is presented to the drawee bank within a period of six
months from the date of its issue.
(b) If the complainant has demanded payment of cheque amount within thirty days
of receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the dishonour of the cheque
(c) If the drawer has failed to pay the cheque amount within fifteen days of receipt of
such notice.
(iv) The facts constituting cause of action do not constitute the ingredients of the
offence under Section 138 of the Act.
(v) The proviso to Section 138 simply postpones/defers institution of criminal
proceedings and taking of cognizance by the Court till such time cause of action in
terms of clause (c) of proviso accrues to the complainant.
(vi) Once the cause of action accrues to the complainant, the jurisdiction of the Court
to try the case will be determined by reference to the place where the cheque is
dishonoured.
(vii) The general rule stipulated under Section 177 of Cr.P.C applies to cases under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. Prosecution in such cases can,
therefore, be launched against the drawer of the cheque only before the Court within
whose jurisdiction the dishonour takes place except in situations where the offence of
dishonour of the cheque punishable under Section 138 is committed along with other
offences in a single transaction within the meaning of Section 220(1) read with
Section 184 of the Code of Criminal Procedure or is covered by the provisions of
Section 182(1) read with Sections 184 and 220 thereof.”
4. In order to resolve the concerns regarding the said judgment, the President of
India promulgated an Ordinance, called Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2015. The said Ordinance, thereafter, became an Act, namely, Negotiable
Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015.
Amendments were made by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015, which read as
under:
“An Act further to amend the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of June, 2015.
2. In the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section
(i) in Explanation I, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— ‘(a) “a cheque
in the electronic form” means a cheque drawn in electronic form by using any computer resource
and signed in a secure system with digital signature (with or without biometrics signature) and
asymmetric crypto system or with electronic signature, as the case may be;
(ii) after Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— ‘Explanation III.-For
the purposes of this section, the expressions “asymmetric crypto system”, “computer resource”,
“digital signature”, “electronic form” and “electronic signature” shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Information Technology Act, 2000.’.
3. In the principal Act, section 142 shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after
sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— “(2) The
offence under section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a court within whose local
jurisdiction,-
(a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the
payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is situated; or
(b) if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or holder in due course, otherwise through
an account, the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer maintains the account, is situated.
Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (a), where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch
of the bank of the payee or holder in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been
delivered to the branch of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be,
maintains the account.”.
4. In the principal Act, after section 142, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— “142A.(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any judgment,
decree, order or direction of any court, all cases transferred to the court having jurisdiction under
sub- section (2) of section 142, as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance,
2015, shall be deemed to have been transferred under this Act, as if that sub-section had been in
force at all material times. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 142
or sub-section (1), where the payee or the holder in due course, as the case may be, has filed a
complaint against the drawer of a cheque in the court having jurisdiction under sub-section (2) of
section 142 or the case has been transferred to that court under sub- section (1) and such complaint
is pending in that court, all subsequent complaints arising out of section 138 against the same
drawer shall be filed before the same court irrespective of whether those cheques were delivered for
collection or presented for payment with.
(3) If, on the date of the commencement of the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015,
more than one prosecution filed by the same payee or holder in due course, as the case may be,
against the same drawer of cheques is pending before different courts, upon the said fact having
been brought to the notice of the court, such court shall transfer the case to the court having
jurisdiction under sub-section (2) of section 142, as amended by the Negotiable Instruments
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, before which the first case was filed and is pending, as if that
sub-section had been in force at all material times.
5. (1) The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2015, is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.”
5. By virtue of the said amendment, the entire basis of the judgment of Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod
(supra) has been removed. The power of the Legislature to take away the basis of a judgment by
making amendments is well settled. It is trite law that the Legislature can take away the basis of the
judgment of a judicial pronouncement by either passing a Validating Act or passing amendments to
the parent Act. [Refer. State of Karnataka v. Karnataka Pawn Brokers Association reported in (2018)
6 SCC 363; State of Karnataka v. Pro Lab reported in (2015) 8 SCC 557; Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills
Ltd. v. Broach Borough Municipality reported in (1969) 2 SCC 283 : AIR 1970 Supreme Court 192;
Gujarat Ambuja Cements v. Union of India reported in (2005) 4 SCC 214; State Bank's Staff Union
(Madras Circle) v. Union of India reported in (2005) 7 SCC 584]
6. In view of the above, there is no infirmity in the amendment. Even otherwise, the Parliament is
competent to bring out the amendment under the Negotiable Instruments Act. The said amendment
cannot be said to be ultra vires in view of the provisions of the Act or Part III of the Constitution of
India. The amendment cannot also be called to be manifestly arbitrary in the absence of any
materials on record.
7. Accordingly, this writ petition is dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected writ miscellaneous
petition is also dismissed.”
60. Thus, indubitably, Section 142 of the N.I. Act was amended and Section 142-A was introduced
with effect from 15.06.2015, to clarify the jurisdictional issue and to address the crisis of transfer of
cases as per the ratio in Dashrath Rupsingh (supra).
61. It is clear on a reading of Section 142(2)(a) and the Explanation thereto that, for the purposes of
clause (a), where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of the bank of the payee or holder
in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered to the branch of the bank in
which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account.
62. A conjoint reading of Section 142(2)(a) along with the explanation thereof, makes the position
emphatically clear that, when a cheque is delivered or issued to a person with liberty to present the
cheque for collection at any branch of the bank where the payee or holder in due course, as the case
may be, maintains the account then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered or issued to
the branch of the bank, in which, the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains
the account, and the court of the place where such cheque was presented for collection, will have the
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint alleging the commission of offence punishable under Section
138 of the N.I. Act. In that view of the position of law, the word ‘delivered’ used in Section 142(2)(a)
of the N.I. Act has no significance. What is of significance is the expression ‘for collection through an
account’. That is to say, delivery of the cheque takes place where the cheque was issued and
presentation of the cheque will be through the account of the payee or holder in due course, and the
said place is decisive to determine the question of jurisdiction.
63. The strong assertion on the part of the petitioner that no part of the cause of action could be said
to have arisen within Chandigarh, is of no avail to them, more particularly when the law itself allows
the institution of a complaint in Chandigarh. The enactment of sub-section (2)(a) of Section 142 of
the N.I. Act and the Explanation thereto allows the complainant to file a complaint before the courts
within whose jurisdiction the collection branch of the bank falls. In the present case, while
contending that the court in Chandigarh lack the jurisdiction to entertain the case, it is not the case
of the petitioner that the respondent Bank has no collection branch in Chandigarh.
64. The argument canvassed on behalf of the petitioner that although the Court in Chandigarh has
the territorial jurisdiction to try the case under Section 138 of the N.I. Act yet as the Court in Delhi
also has the territorial jurisdiction to try the case, the proceedings deserve to be transferred to the
Court in Delhi to take care of two situations for the petitioner (i) language barrier and (ii)
convenience.
65. For the purpose of transfer of any case or proceedings under Section 406 of the Cr.P.C., the case
must fall within the ambit of the expression “expedient for the ends of justice”. Mere inconvenience
or hardship that the accused may have to face in travelling from Coimbatore to Chandigarh would
not fall within the expression “expedient for the ends of justice”. The case must fall within any of the
five situations as narrated in para 49 of this judgment. It is always open for the petitioner accused to
pray for exemption from personal appearance or request the Court that he may be permitted to join
the proceedings online.
CONCLUSION
66. Having regard to the pleadings in the memorandum of the transfer petition, we have reached the
conclusion that no case is made out for transfer of the proceedings in question under 406 CrPC.
67. In the result, the petition fails and is hereby dismissed. All other connected transfer petitions are
also disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
68. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………………………………J. (J. B. PARDIWALA) ………………………………J. (R. MAHADEVAN) New
Delhi.
March 6th, 2025.